[Page 1]
Lecture 1 
 ŌĆō Marine Hydrodynamics 
Lecture 1 
Introduction 
Marine Hydrodynamics is the branch of Fluid Mechanics that studies the motion of incom┬Ł
pressible ’¼éuids (liquids) and the forces acting on solid bodies immersed in them. 
Marine hydrodynamics is a large and diverse subject and only a limited number of topics 
can be covered in an introductory course. The topics that will be covered throughout the 
semester include: 
ŌĆó Model testing and similitude 
ŌĆó Interaction between bodies and ideal ’¼éuids 
ŌĆó Viscosity and boundary layers 
ŌĆó E’¼Ćect of waves on resistance and ship motion 
Why study Marine Hydrodynamics? 
Studying Marine Hydrodynamics provides a greater understanding of a wide range of phe┬Ł
nomena of considerable complexity involving ’¼éuids. Another bene’¼üt is that it allows pre┬Ł
dictions to be made in many areas of practical importance. 

2.20 - Marine Hydrodynamics, Spring 2005
2.20

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 2]
Fluids vs. Solids 
In brief, Fluid Mechanics studies the kinematics and dynamics of a group of particles with┬Ł
out having to study each particle separately. 
Most of us have taken some courses on solids or related to solids. Even those who havenŌĆÖt 
can get an intuitive feeling about some physical properties of a solid. Thus a comparison 
of solids and ’¼éuids will give some guidelines as to which properties can be translated to 
’¼éuids and on what terms. 
Similarities 
1. Fundamental laws of mechanics apply to both ’¼éuids and solids 
Conservation of mass 
Conservation of momentum (NewtonŌĆÖs law of motion) 
Conservation of energy (First law of thermodynamics) 
2. Continuum hypothesis is used for both ’¼éuids and solids 
local value 
measured property 
length scale 
ŌĆ£particleŌĆØ size 
variations due to 
variations due to 
molecular fluctuations 
varying flow 
O(10-10 ŌĆō 10-8)m 
e.g. The smallest measurement scales are in the order of ŌäōM Ōł╝ 10ŌłÆ5m ŌåÆ VM Ōł╝ 10ŌłÆ15m3 . 
This corresponds to Ōł╝ 3 ├Ś 1010 molecules of air in STP or Ōł╝ 1013 molecules of water.

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 3]
ŌĆóŌĆó 
    
 
 
 
 
 
Di’¼Ćerences 
1. Shape 
Solids have de’¼ünite shape 
Fluids have no preferred shape 
2. Constitutive laws 
Constitutive laws are empirical formulas that relate certain unknown variables. 
The constitutive laws used in 13.021 relate: 
dynamics (force, stress ...) to kinematics (position, displacement, velocity ...) 
Di’¼Ćerent constitutive laws are used for solids and di’¼Ćerent for ’¼éuids. 
For solids HookeŌĆÖs law is used to relate stress and strain 
stress 
    
= f 
(strain) 
    
force/area 
relative displacement/length 
 
N/m2  
[m/m] 
ŌĆó For solid mechanics ŌĆśstaticsŌĆÖ is a dominant aspect 
For ’¼éuids stress is related to rate of strain 
stress 
= f (rate of strain) 
force/area 
velocity gradient 
N/m2 
[1/s] 
ŌĆó 
ŌĆóŌĆó Fluids at rest cannot sustain shear force. Fluids have to be moving to be non-trivial. 
The branch of Fluid Mechanics that studies ’¼éuids at rest is referred to as ŌĆśHydrostaticsŌĆÖ. 
(Archimedes, c 200 BC) 
Hydrostatics study the trivial case where no stresses due to ’¼éuid motion exist. 
Sometimes distinction between liquids and solids is not a sharp one(honey, jelly, paint, . . . ).  
Fortunately most common ’¼éuids, such as air and water are very close to ŌĆØidealŌĆØ ’¼éuids.

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 4]
Liquids vs. Gasses 
Liquids and gasses are two categories of ’¼éuids. 
A ’¼éuid is ŌĆśa body whose particles move easily among themselves. Fluid is a generic term, 
including liquids and gasses as species. Water, air, and steam are ’¼éuids.ŌĆÖ [1]. 
A liquid is ŌĆśBeing in such a state that the component parts move freely among themselves, 
but do not tend to separate from each other as the particles of gases and vapors do; neither 
solid nor aeriform.ŌĆÖ[1] 
A gas is ŌĆśThe state of matter distinguished from the solid and liquid states by relatively low 
density and viscosity, relatively great expansion and contraction with changes in pressure 
and temperature, the ability to di’¼Ćuse readily, and the spontaneous tendency to become dis┬Ł
tributed uniformly throughout any container.ŌĆÖ[2] 
In brief, a liquid is generally incompressible and does not ’¼üll a volume by expanding into 
it while on the other hand, a gas is compressible and expands to ’¼üll any volume containing it. 
The science that studies the dynamics of liquids is referred to as ŌĆśHydrodynamicsŌĆÖ, while 
the science that studies the dynamics of gasses is referred to as ŌĆśAerodynamicsŌĆÖ. 
The main di’¼Ćerence between the study of ŌĆśHydrodynamicsŌĆÖ and the study of ŌĆśAerodynam┬Ł
icsŌĆÖ is the property of incompressibility. In general hydrodynamic ’¼éows are treated as 
incompressible while aerodynamic ’¼éows are treated as compressible. 
[1] Webster Dictionary 
[2] American Heritage Dictionary

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 5]
Why is a liquid ’¼éow incompressible? 
It can be shown that the ratio of the characteristic ’¼éuid velocities U in a ’¼éow to the 
speed of sound C in the medium gives a measure of compressibility of the medium for that 
particular ’¼éow. This ratio is called the Mach number M. Although the speed of sound 
in water is of comparable magnitude to the speed of sound in air, the characteristic ’¼éuid 
velocities in water are signi’¼ücantly smaller. Thus in the case of water, the Mach number 
is very small, indicating that water is virtually incompressible. 
U : Characteristic ’¼éuid ’¼éow velocity 
C : Speed of sound in the medium 
U 
M ŌēĪ 
: Mach number 
C 
The average speed of sound in air and water is: 
Cair Ōł╝ 300m/s = 984ft/sec = 583knots 
Cwater Ōł╝ 1200m/s = 3, 937ft/sec = 2, 333knots 
Therefore the average ratio of the speed of sound in water to air is Cwater Ōł╝ 4. Further on, 
Cair 
because the average water to air density ratio is Žüwater Ōł╝ 
1kg/m3 = 103, it is ŌĆśharderŌĆÖ to 
Žüair 
103kg/m3 
move in water and therefore, typically, it is: 
Uwater<<Uair 
giving thus typical values of Mach numbers in the order of: 
Mair Ōł╝ O(1) ŌćÆ COMPRESSIBLE ’¼éow 
Mwater<<1 ŌćÆ INCOMPRESSIBLE ’¼éow 
Note: An incompressible ’¼éow does not mean constant density.