when the pressure in the fluid is reduced below the vapor pressure pν, the physical state of the fluid abruptly changes to that of a gas. Thus, while the fluid is extremely inelastic in compression, it cannot nor­ mally sustain significant tension. Dimensional considerations suggest the cavitation number σ ρ ν = − p p U 2 , which is a measure of the likelihood of cavitation and parametrically describes the subsequent details. Here p0 is a characteristic pressure level

Introduction 

in the fluid, such as the hydrostatic pressure at the depth in question, and 
the vapor pressure pν depends on the properties of the fluid and its tem­
perature. If the cavitation number is large, cavitation will not occur, and 
the precise value of σ is immaterial to the description and analysis of the 
flow. If the cavitation number is sufficiently small so that cavitation occurs 
in the flow field, dynamic similarity between two flows will exist only if 
the corresponding cavitation numbers are equal. At normal temperatures 
pν is substantially less than the atmospheric pressure, and thus cavitation is 
significant only at very high speeds.
Fluid motions that have similar geometries but different values of the rel­
evant physical parameters are said to be dynamically similar if the relevant 
nondimensional parameters such as the Froude and Reynolds numbers are 
equal. It follows that the relative balance between the inertial, viscous, and 
gravitational forces is identical, and the resulting hydrodynamic effects, 
including fluid velocity, pressure, and forces acting on the boundaries of 
the fluid can all be analyzed by means of relationships between the two 
different flows. Dynamic similitude is clearly desirable if one is conducting 
small-scale model tests that can be used to design large-scale vessels. How­
ever, the simultaneous scaling of both Froude and Reynolds numbers is not 
possible, at least for reasonable changes of length scale with water as the 
full-scale fluid. To see this simply note that the ratio of the Reynolds and 
Froude numbers, (g1/2l3/2/ν), must stay constant. For a model length sub­
stantially smaller than the full-scale vessel, either the gravitational accelera­
tion must be increased or the viscosity coefficient decreased, by an order of 
magnitude. The former suggests a centrifuge and the latter a superfluid, but 
neither is amenable to exploitation in this context.
This discussion of dynamic similitude demonstrates that assumptions 
or simplifications are often necessary to apply experimental methods with 
models to the hydrodynamics of ocean vessels. This is equally true, if not 
more so, if one wishes to pursue a strictly analytical prediction based on 
rational mechanics. Ultimately, therefore, we must expect both experi­
ments and theory to be used and to be supplemented by full-scale observa­
tions to verify the original predictions.
In the theoretical approach the motion of the fluid is defined at each 
point in time and space by a kinematic description, usually of the vectorial 
velocity of the fluid particles or alternatively of the three scalar compo­
nents of the velocity. This unknown velocity function is related by means