θ ω ω = − − (192) for three and two dimensions, respectively. More precise estimates can be developed from Davis (1976), and for horizontal motions as noted in prob­ lem 15. Returning to the transfer function (190) for intermediate frequencies, the most significant feature will be a resonant response at the natural fre­ quency where the virtual mass and restoring forces cancel, or where ωn c a M = +     1 2 / . (193)

Chapter 6
At or near this resonant frequency, the body will experience a response of 
large amplitude and a phase shift increasing from zero for low frequencies 
to 180 degrees for ω ≫ ωn.
As in the case of a mechanical oscillator, the resonant response will be 
inversely proportional to the damping coefficient, but here there is a con­
nection between the exciting force and the damping coefficient from the 
Haskind relations. In particular, for two-dimensional or axisymmetric bod­
ies the damping coefficient will be proportional to the square of the excit­
ing force, and the resonant response will be inversely proportional to the 
exciting force. Thus, bodies deliberately designed with small exciting forces 
will experience a large resonant response, in a highly-tuned manner. Verti­
cal spar buoys are important examples of this situation, as shown in figure 
2.16 and in problem 17. By comparison, the floating hemisphere shown in 
figure 6.24 is typical of the situation where the exciting force, damping, and 
resonant response assume relatively moderate values.
The analogy with a mechanical oscillator can be emphasized by rewrit­
ing (187) in the time-dependent form
(
) ( )
( )
( )
Re(
).
M
a
t
b
t
c
t
AX e
ij
ij
j
ij
j
ij
j
i
i t
+
+
+
=


ξ
ξ
ξ
ω
	
(194)
However, the simplicity of this result is deceptive, and the analogy with 
a mechanical oscillator must not be pushed too far. Equation (194) has 
been derived assuming the motions are sinusoidal in time, as evidenced 
by the fact that the added-mass and damping coefficients depend on the 
frequency ω. Thus, one cannot extend (194) directly to the case where the 
time-dependence is more general, although one can do so by suitable super­
position of the incident waves and body motions at each frequency. We 
shall return to this representation in section 6.21.
The distinction between the left side of (194) and a mechanical oscillator 
with constant coefficients can be further emphasized by noting that when 
the body is forced to oscillate, waves will be generated on the free surface. 
As time increases, these waves will propagate outward from the body, but 
they will continue to affect the fluid pressure and hence the body force for 
all subsequent times. Thus memory effects are introduced, in a manner pre­
cisely analogous to the unsteady lifting surface theory in chapter 5.
One consequence of the memory effects is that if ξj(t) is an arbitrary 
function of time, and if the linearization assumption is invoked, the pres­
sure force acting on the body must be of the general form