frequency spectrum S S d ( ) ( , ) . ω ω θ θ π = ∫ (200) If one attempts to find the ocean-wave spectrum from measurements of the free-surface elevation at a single point in space, for instance by record­ ing the heave motion of a buoy, the directional characteristic of the waves will be lost. Only the frequency spectrum (200) can be determined from such a restricted set of data. A limited amount of directional information

Waves and Wave Effects 

follows if one measures the slope of the free surface, for example by mea­
suring the angular response of the buoy as well as its heave. A complete 
description of the directional wave spectrum requires an extensive array of 
measurements at several adjacent points in space, however, and there are 
practical difficulties associated with this task.
As a simpler alternative, one can assume that the waves are unidirec­
tional, with the energy spectrum proportional to a delta function in θ. 
Wave spectra of this form are called long crested, since the fluid motion is 
two-dimensional and the wave crests are parallel. If one assumes that the 
spectrum is of this character, with the direction prescribed, the frequency 
spectrum (200) is sufficient to describe the wave environment.
If the waves are generated by a single storm, far removed from the point 
of observation, it might be presumed that these waves would come from 
the direction of the storm in a long-crested manner. The limitations of this 
assumption are apparent to anyone who has observed the ocean surface. 
While a preferred direction may exist, especially for long swell that has 
traveled large distances, even these long waves will be distributed in their 
direction, and for short steep waves the directional variation is particularly 
significant. Since the superposition of such waves from a range of different 
directions appears in space as a variation of the free-surface elevation in all 
directions, these waves are known as short-crested waves.
Information on directional spectra is limited, although the knowledge 
of this subject is likely to increase as sophisticated measurement techniques 
and data analysis are applied. More extensive discussion of this subject is 
given by Kinsman (1965), Neumann and Pierson (1966), Lewis (1967), and 
Price and Bishop (1974).
In part from necessity, but with the presumption that a conservative 
estimate of wave effects on vessels will result, it is customary to proceed in 
the fields of ocean engineering and naval architecture on the assumption 
that the waves are long-crested. With this simplification it is possible to use 
existing information for the frequency spectrum (200), which is based on a 
judicious combination of theory and full-scale observations.
Ocean-wave spectra depend on the velocity of the wind as well as its 
duration in time and the distance over which the wind is acting on the free 
surface. This distance is known as the fetch. Wave spectra that have reached 
a steady-state of equilibrium, independent of the duration and fetch are