that of a flat plate of the same length and area, found a more rational justification after Prandtl developed the boundary-layer theory. Thus it became evident that at the relatively large Reynolds numbers of interest to naval architects and aerodynamicists, vis­ cous stresses are significant only within the very thin layer of the fluid adjoining the rigid surfaces such as the ship’s hull or the airplane. Out­ side this layer the fluid is essentially inviscid, not because its viscosity has

Introduction 

suddenly changed but because viscous stresses are a consequence of large 
gradients in the fluid velocity and these large gradients are restricted to the 
immediate vicinity of the boundary. Moreover, the flow within the bound­
ary layer is relatively insensitive to the form of the boundary, provided the 
body’s radii of curvature are large compared to the thickness of the bound­
ary layer. The consequences of Prandtl’s boundary-layer theory would 
appear to be fundamental to Froude’s hypothesis, and it is remarkable that 
Froude predated Prandtl by thirty years.
In the chapters to follow, model testing will be discussed first, with 
emphasis on the use of dimensional analysis to preserve dynamic similarity 
between the model and full-scale flows. This glimpse of the “real-world” 
will serve to introduce the theories that follow in subsequent chapters. The 
theoretical approach will commence with a study of viscous flows so that 
the importance of viscosity can be set in proper perspective.
Each chapter begins with a general treatment of the essentials and pro­
gresses to more specialized and advanced material. The order in which this 
is studied can be varied to suit one’s interests and background. Readers anx­
ious to proceed to their favorite subject, but lacking the prerequisites to do 
so directly, should find most of their needs met in sections 3.1 to 3.9 and 
4.1 to 4.5. In the references listed at the end of each chapter, preference has 
been given to recent surveys and papers with comprehensive bibliographies 
where additional information on each topic may be sought.

2  Model Testing
Chapter 

Model 
Testing
© Massachusetts Institute of TechnologyAll Rights Reserved
For most of us, toy boats and models are a useful childhood introduction 
to the subject of hydrodynamics. Given a block of wood, a sharp knife, and 
the plans of a ship or small boat, few would resist the impulse to produce 
a model. Our choice of scale ratio would be determined by the dimensions 
of the block of wood. Perhaps future engineering interests are indicated if 
a ruler is used to ensure a “true scale model.” If the model is subsequently 
operated in its natural medium, the builder must determine the proper 
weight and, in the most refined examples, an appropriate power system 
to drive the model at the “true” speed of the real ship. The weight may be 
determined by an application of Archimedes’ principle in the bathtub or 
sink, but the questions pertaining to speed and power are more complex 
and, strictly speaking, impossible to answer. Superficial bathtub observa­
tions might reveal that the flow of water around the model is reasonably 
like that of a large ship, meaning that the observed waves look realistic, if 
the model speed is on the order of half a meter per second, or one knot. 
On the other hand, if we could observe the viscous flow very close to the 
surface of the hull and in the wake immediately behind the stern, gross dif­
ferences would be apparent between the ship and its scale model.1
This situation can be better understood by a dimensional analysis. 
Denote the physical quantity of interest by Q (for example, the resistance 
of a body moving through the water, the thickness of the boundary layer, 
or the acceleration of a buoy in waves). First it is necessary to list, from a 
qualitative knowledge of the underlying physical mechanisms involved, 
the significant parameters that affect the value of Q (length, velocity, den­
sity, viscosity, and so forth). In general, some or all of these parameters can 
be used to make Q nondimensional, and any not needed for this purpose 
can themselves be rendered nondimensional. We then assert that when