of motion for the spar buoy shown in figure 2.16 is mÿ + ρgS0(y − A cos ωt) = 0 where y(t) is the heave amplitude, S0 is the waterplane area, and A is the wave amplitude. Use the solution in section 3.13 for sinusoidal motion of a flat plate to derive a linear damping coef­ ficient proportional to the submerged area of the cylindrical portion of the spar buoy. Using this estimate of the damping coefficient, find the resonant

The Motion of a Viscous Fluid 

response for a spar buoy of diameter 1m and draft 5 m in waves of ampli­
tude 0.5 m.
3. Modify the analysis of section 3.10 for the case where the upper bound­
ary is a free surface with no stress. Include the component of the hydrostatic 
pressure acting in the direction of the flow and find the surface velocity of a 
fluid of depth 1cm flowing down an inclined plane of angle 1 degree. Based 
on this steady-state solution, what is the surface current in the Cape Cod 
Canal, where the depth is 10 m, the length is 10 km, and the maximum 
difference in elevation between the two ends is 3 m? Give several reasons 
why this estimate is exaggerated.
4. Reformulate the problem of the Cape Cod Canal as stated in problem 3, 
assuming that this motion is sinusoidal in time with period 12 hours and 
that the velocity is horizontal and a function only of the vertical coordi­
nate. Show that the solution is of the form
u y t
e
ae
be
c
i t
ky
ky
( , )
Re[
(
)].
=
+
+
−
ω
Determine the constants in this equation, the maximum velocity on the 
surface, and the phase shift between the current and the tidal difference at 
the two ends. (The actual current in this canal is about five knots.)
5. For a Reynolds number of 106, compute the displacement thickness 
and shear stress at the boundary for laminar (Blasius) and turbulent (1/7 
power) boundary layers. Use these results to sketch the two velocity pro­
files, as was done in figure 3.9, but with the vertical scale (y) preserved in 
both curves.
6. For a 2 m ship model moving at 1.0 m/s, estimate the displacement thick­
ness of the boundary layer at the stern, using the Blasius result for Laminar 
flow, and the 1/7 power law for turbulent flow. Compare the resulting val­
ues of δ*/l with the corresponding turbulent result for a 200 m ship moving 
at 10 m/s.
7. Given the differences between salt and fresh water at the same tempera­
ture, how would the boundary-layer thickness and shear stress of a ship 
change as it moves from salt water into fresh water, if the ship’s velocity 
and the water temperature are unchanged?
8. A common speed-measuring device for small boats is a paddlewheel that 
protrudes about 1cm from the hull surface and rotates about an axis flush