α, between the orienta­ tion of the hydrofoil and the free-stream direction. Figure 2.5 Flow past a hydrofoil section. The angle of attack α is generally defined with respect to the “nose-tail line,” between the center of the minimum radius of curvature of the leading edge and the sharp trailing edge. L and D denote the lift and drag com­ ponents of the total force F, and are defined respectively to be perpendicular and parallel to the free-stream velocity vector.

Model Testing 

In this section the dimensional analysis of lifting surfaces is outlined in 
a form that can be used with model tests to predict the lift and drag forces 
acting on full-scale hydrofoils. Geometrical similarity is assumed, as in the 
earlier sections of this chapter.
For the two-dimensional case shown in figure 2.5, the length scale of 
the hydrofoil or its model can be described by the chord length l. In three 
dimensions, the lateral extent of the hydrofoil is its span s. For geomet­
rically similar hydrofoils, either l or s can be used as the characteristic 
length for dimensional analysis of the lift and drag force. However, as in 
the case of the viscous drag on a flat plate, the results will be more general 
if we anticipate that the force acting on a lifting surface is approximately 
proportional to the planform area S. For a planar hydrofoil this can be 
defined as the projected area of the foil in the direction of the lift force, 
with α = 0.
We shall assume that the hydrofoil operates in a steady-state manner 
with constant velocity and angle of attack, in an unbounded fluid, and 
that the ambient pressure is sufficiently high to preclude cavitation. Thus 
the relevant physical parameters affecting the hydrodynamic forces are the 
planform area S, velocity U, angle of attack α, fluid density ρ and the kine­
matic viscosity υ). The lift and drag forces can be expressed in the nondi­
mensional forms
L
U S
C
R
L



ρ
α
=
( , ), 	
(16)
D
U S
C
R
D



ρ
α
=
( , ). 	
(17)
As in the case of the flat plate, viscous effects depend primarily on the 
length scale of the body parallel to the free-stream direction. For this reason 
the chord length l is used to define the Reynolds number R = Ul/υ.
Values of the lift and drag coefficients can be obtained experimentally 
by placing a scale model in a wind tunnel or water tunnel. The angle of 
attack can be varied by a suitable arrangement and the force components 
measured with dynamometers. Here again, however, there is a practical 
difficulty in preserving the full-scale Reynolds number. Thus the drag is 
generally treated as for a streamlined nonlifting body, accounting for the 
Reynolds number dependence simply in terms of the frictional drag of a