plane are of practical importance in some cases. Both subjects are beyond the scope of this text, but references can be found in Bishop and Price (1975). Additional references are noted in section 2.15. Problems 1. For plane progressive waves of height 6 m and length 200 m in deep water, find the phase velocity, the maximum velocity of a fluid particle, and the position where this maximum occurs. How do these change if the fluid depth is 30 m?

Waves and Wave Effects 

2. Give the velocity potential for standing waves in finite depth, which 
reduces to (53) as kh → ∞. Show that this corresponds to the solution of a 
problem where incident waves are totally reflected by a vertical wall. Using 
the linearized Bernoulli equation, find the horizontal wave force exerted 
on the wall. Compute the magnitude of this force if A = 1
2 m, h = 10 m, and 
λ = 50 m.
3. The mass transport (49) can be computed to second order in finite depth 
by taking the time average of the horizontal flux across a vertical control 
surface, between −h and η, after noting that ϕx = −(k/ω)ϕt for a progres­
sive wave and that the time average of ϕt must be zero if the motion is 
periodic. In this manner show that the generalization of (49) in the form 
Q
gA
Vp
= 1

2 /
 is valid for finite depths.
4. Derive expressions for the kinetic and potential energies of a standing 
wave in finite depth, and show that the total energy per wavelength is con­
stant. Since the standing wave is equivalent to two identical plane progres­
sive waves propagating in opposite directions, show that the energy of each 
plane wave is divided equally into kinetic and potential portions.
5. Compute the maximum electric power that can be generated by a device 
that converts all of the energy from plane progressive waves, of height 
1 m and wavelength 100 m, over a width of 1 km parallel to the wave 
crests.
6. A wavemaker at x = 0 is turned on at time t = 0. At t = 10 s the maximum 
possible wave amplitude is desired at x = 20 m. Show that the appropriate 
frequency for the wavemaker is ω = C1 − C2t, assuming deep water. Find the 
constants C1 and C2. Describe qualitatively how this result can be changed 
to account for finite-depth effects.
7. A ship model of length 5 m is moved with a constant speed of l m/s 
for a distance of 100 m, in a wide towing tank. At the end of this run the 
model is stopped, and thereafter it is affected by the transverse waves com­
ing upon it from astern. What is the period of these waves, and what is their 
wavelenth? Assuming the back edge of this wave system is sharp, separating 
a region of calm water from the region of the transverse waves, how many 
waves exist in the towing tank at the time the model is stopped? How many 
waves will ultimately move past the model after it has stopped?
8. Waves of period five seconds are incident upon a gradually shoaling 
beach in a two-dimensional manner. At what depth will the wave height