because the flow associated with the image dipole will distort the streamlines moving past the first dipole, but this effect will be small if the ratio a/b is small. The corresponding result for a pair of spheres, or for a single sphere moving near a wall, is readily obtained. This procedure can be extended to a body or source situated between two parallel walls, say at y b = ± 1 2 . In this case, to satisfy the boundary

The Motion of an Ideal Fluid 

conditions on both walls simultaneously, it is necessary to use an infinite 
row of images, at y = ± b, ± 2b, ± 3b, … . In two-dimensional problems, the 
resulting infinite series for sources and dipoles can be summed in closed 
form, or the solutions can be guessed by noting that these must be peri­
odic functions of y with period b. Thus, the complex source potential is 
given by
F
m
z
b
= 2π
π
logsinh
, 	
(155)
and the flow past a (distorted) circle is given by the superposition of a free 
stream and dipole, in the form
F
Uz
U a
b
z b
=
+ π
π
(
/ )coth
/ .

(156)
These problems are discussed by Lamb (1932), who notes that the distor­
tion of the circle is negligible provided its diameter is less than half of the 
space between the walls.
The problem of a vertical flat plate, situated midway between two par­
allel horizontal walls, can be solved in closed form, as outlined by Sedov 
(1965). The added-mass coefficient in this case is given by the expression
m
b
a
b



= −ρ π
π
logcos
, 	
(157)
where 2a is the breadth of the plate. This result is exact, and the two limit­
ing cases are a single flat plate in an infinite fluid when a/b → 0 and a com­
pletely blocked channel with infinite added mass when a/b → 1/2. Similar 
results for rectangular profiles are given in numerica1 form by Flagg and 
Newman (1971).
Wall corrections for wind tunnels and water tunnels can be derived in 
this manner. For three-dimensional motion in a rectangular tunnel, a dou­
bly infinite array of image bodies or singularities is required.
Problems
1. Show that the velocity potentials defined by the real parts of the complex 
potentials in figures 4.4 and 4.5 satisfy the correct boundary conditions on 
the boundaries of each flow. Assuming each of these flows is steady, what 
is the corresponding expression for the pressure throughout the fluid and 
along the boundaries?