problem, with a specified load dis­ tribution, is actually simpler to solve, since (30) becomes a definite integral instead of an integral equation with an unknown integrand. In the present case, with γ = constant, and after invoking the boundary condition (22) for the vertical velocity, we have ∂ ∂ = − = − + − η γ π ξ ξ γ π x U d x U l x l x l l log ½ ½ . −∫ (48)

Chapter 5
Integrating with respect to x, we obtain the desired mean camber
η
γ
π
= −
+
(
)
+
(
) +
−
(
)
−
(
)
{
}
2 U
l
x
x l
l
x
x l
½
½
½
½
log
log
. 	
(49)
From (48) it is apparent that requiring uniform load distribution has led 
to a mean-camber line with infinite slope at both ends. This is not a serious 
objection at the leading edge where the effects of thickness will alleviate the 
singularity, but the infinite slope at the trailing edge causes flow separation 
or cavitation and hence should be avoided. This difficulty might have been 
anticipated, since the Kutta condition cannot be satisfied unless the load­
ing vanishes at the trailing edge.
A more practical foil shape may be obtained by relaxing the require­
ment of uniform loading near the trailing edge and assuming a vortex dis­
tribution that vanishes there. The simplest family of such foils is the NACA 
a series, with constant loading from the leading edge downstream over a 
distance al, followed by a linear attenuation as shown in figure 5.11. The 
corresponding mean-camber lines are shown in figure 5.12, and a = 0.8 is 
a common choice for practical purposes. A detailed account of these and 
other foil geometries is given by Abbott and von Doenhoff (1959).
5.5  Drag Force on a Two-Dimensional Foil
Thus far in our discussion of two-dimensional steady foils, we have 
neglected the drag force parallel to the x-axis. One reason for this omission 
is that lifting surfaces are intended to produce lift forces with a minimum 
of drag or with a large lift-drag ratio L/D. However, a second reason for 
Figure 5.11
Loading of NACA a mean-camber lines.

Lifting Surfaces 

omitting drag from the preceding analysis is that no drag force acts upon a 
steady two-dimensional foil in an inviscid fluid. Viscous drag must be antici­
pated in a real fluid, and experimental results such as those shown in figure 
2.7 confirm this, but the magnitude of the total drag force is comparable 
to the skin-friction drag coefficient for small angles of attack. Subsequently, 
in dealing with three-dimensional lifting surfaces and with unsteady twodimensional foils, a nonzero drag force will occur in the inviscid theory, but 
this cannot be analyzed within the steady two-dimensional theory.
The absence of a drag force, despite the existence of lift, can be veri­
fied from the general form of the Kutta-Joukowski theorem (equation 15; 
see also problem 3). The most general form of this theorem states that the 
hydrodynamic force vector is equal in magnitude to the product ρUΓ, with 
Γ the total circulation about the foil; it also states that this force is normal 
to the direction of the streaming flow.
A more elementary proof of zero drag follows from an energy analysis. 
The velocity field induced by the foil is steady state in a coordinate system 
moving with the foil and vanishes at large distances from the foil. The 
Figure 5.12
Mean-camber lines for NACA a series.