with constant velocity U in oth­ erwise calm water and if the motion has reached a steady state, the only waves that can exist downstream move with a phase velocity Vp = U. Any other waves would either overtake the body, or drop further behind, in an unsteady manner. Since the phase velocity is fixed, the wavelength and the wave number must take prescribed values; for the deep-water case they are given by λ = 2πU2/g and k = g/U2.

Chapter 6
The waves generated by the body contain energy that must be imparted 
to the fluid as work done by the body on the fluid. Thus, the body will 
experience a drag force D due to its wave resistance; the purpose of our 
analysis is to relate D to the wave amplitude A far downstream.
Figure 6.12 shows a sketch of this situation in a fixed frame of reference, 
as well as in a reference frame moving with the body. The fixed system 
shown in (a) pertains to our analysis of the energy density and flux. The 
values of these quantities are indicated in the figure in terms of the wave 
amplitude A. The body and waves move with velocity U in the + x-direction, 
and thus there is a positive flux of energy across the fixed control surface 
downstream.
Since the control surface is fixed and the body is moving, the length of 
the fluid region between the two will increase with velocity U, and the total 
energy in this region will increase at a rate equal to the product of U and the 
Figure 6.12
Two-dimensional ship waves as viewed by a fixed observer (a), and in a reference 
frame moving with the ship (b).

Waves and Wave Effects 

energy density 1


ρgA . The energy input necessary to balance this increase 
results in part from the work done at a rate DU by the body, in opposition 
to the wave drag D. In accordance with (78), energy also enters the fluid 
region across the control surface downstream, at a rate equal to the product 
of the energy density and group velocity 1
2 U. From energy conservation it 
follows that






ρ
ρ
gA U
DU
gA U
=
+
. 	
(79)
Solving this equation for the drag D yields
D
gA
= 1


ρ
. 	
(80)
The same conclusion follows from the alternative analysis based on the 
moving reference frame of figure 6.12(b). Here the position of the control 
surface is fixed relative to the body, and the total energy of the intermedi­
ate fluid region is constant. The rate of work done by the body on the fluid 
is unchanged by the transformation to a moving coordinate system, but 
across the downstream control surface the energy now moves at the relative 
velocity V
U
U
g −
= −1

. If the latter is multiplied by the energy density, the 
energy balance takes the form
DU
gA U
−
=




ρ
, 	
(81)
which is equivalent to (79) and (80).
Thus, if a two-dimensional body generates waves of amplitude A because 
of its steady motion on the free surface, the associated wave drag is 1


ρgA . 
This result by itself does not provide a means for predicting the wave 
resistance, however, since we do not have a method for calculating the 
wave amplitude A generated by the body. Physically, the latter quantity 
will depend on the body geometry, as well as the velocity U. One might 
expect that increasing the body size or the velocity will increase A and thus 
the wave resistance. However, the latter conclusion overlooks the possibili­
ties of destructive interference, which may be emphasized with a simple 
example.
Let us consider a single small disturbance, which generates waves of 
amplitude a. The resulting free-surface profile, in a coordinate system mov­
ing with the disturbance, will have the form
η
ε
=
+
a
kx
cos(
), 	
(82)