can be predicted from the flat-plate drag coefficient CF. The pressure drag is more important for two-dimensional cylinders or struts, because of the increased obstruction of the flow past the body in two dimensions. Figure 2.4 shows the total drag coefficient for a circular cylin­ der, two streamlined struts with thickness-length ratios of 1/2 and 1/4, and the limiting case of zero thickness given by twice the flat-plate frictional drag coefficient. This figure illustrates the conflicting roles of transition to

Model Testing 

turbulence, which decreases the drag of bluff bodies and increases the drag 
of fine bodies.
If the body has sharp edges not aligned with the flow, separation will 
generally occur at these edges irrespective of the Reynolds number or the 
state of the upstream boundary layer. For example, a circular disc mov­
ing normal to its plane will experience separation at the periphery; the 
drag coefficient for this body is about 1.1 for all Reynolds numbers greater 
than 103.
In summary, the drag coefficient of a body moving in a viscous fluid will 
depend in general on the Reynolds number; but for a bluff body at large 
Reynolds numbers the drag coefficient is insensitive to Reynolds number 
except insofar as this affects the point of separation.
Figure 2.4
Drag coefficient as a function of Reynolds number for two-dimensional cylinders 
of maximum thickness-to-length ratio t/l. For the flat plate (t/l = 0) the curve shown 
is twice the skin-friction coefficient of figure 2.3, and the shaded areas of this and 
the circular cylinder indicate the general range of uncertainty depending on ambi­
ent turbulence and roughness of the surface. For the intermediate cylinders, the 
precise values of the drag coefficients will depend on the shape, especially near 
transition.

Chapter 2
2.7  Hydrofoil Lift and Drag
Hydrofoils, rudders, propeller blades, yacht sails, and keels are diverse 
examples of lifting surfaces. Generally these are thin streamlined bodies, 
intended to develop a hydrodynamic lift force L. The term hydrofoil will be 
used in a generalized sense to encompass all possible applications of lifting 
surfaces, as opposed to the strict definition of the supporting devices for a 
hydrofoil boat.
The performance of hydrofoils in water is analogous to that of airplane 
wings (and sails) in air, the principal distinction between these being the 
density of the fluid medium. The term lift derives from the aeronautical 
context and is used for the corresponding force component on a lifting 
surface regardless of its orientation in space. In particular, the lift force on a 
rudder, yacht sail, or keel is generally horizontal.
Inevitably, hydrofoils experience a drag force D, and the total force F is 
a vector quantity, with components (D, L). In a reference frame moving 
with the hydrofoil, the drag component is in the same direction as the free 
stream, as shown in figure 2.5. By definition, the lift force is perpendicular 
to the free stream, regardless of the angle of attack, α, between the orienta­
tion of the hydrofoil and the free-stream direction.
Figure 2.5
Flow past a hydrofoil section. The angle of attack α is generally defined with respect 
to the “nose-tail line,” between the center of the minimum radius of curvature of 
the leading edge and the sharp trailing edge. L and D denote the lift and drag com­
ponents of the total force F, and are defined respectively to be perpendicular and 
parallel to the free-stream velocity vector.