the viscous stress. In this region we expect the parameter y/δ to be important, in conjunction with the outer “boundary condition” that u = U when y/δ = 1. This suggests the appropriate form for the outer approximation of (95), or the velocity-defect law U u u f y − = τ δ 2( / ). (99) The velocity difference has been used to impose the outer boundary condi­ tion in the form f2 1 ( ) . = (100)

Chapter 3
Moreover, equation (99) reflects the significant fact that in the outer region, 
momentum flux is balanced by the Reynolds stress and the former depends 
not on the absolute velocity u but on the velocity defect U − u.
To amplify briefly on the justification for the velocity-defect law, let us 
view the flow in a frame of reference moving with the free stream. Here 
the relative fluid velocity is ur = u − U, which can be expressed in the non­
dimensional form (99). In these terms, U now enters only in the boundary 
condition on the plate y = 0, where ur = −U. However, in terms of the flow in 
the outer region, the plate is deeply embedded within the viscous sublayer; 
its effect on the momentum balance in the outer region is represented by 
the shear stress at the wall, and hence by the friction velocity uτ. On this 
basis the relative velocity ur in the outer region must depend only on uτ and 
y/δ, as assumed in (99).
At this point two complementary expressions have been obtained for 
the velocity in the turbulent boundary layer; the inner approximation (96) 
is valid in the viscous sublayer, and the outer approximation (99) is valid in 
the main portion of the boundary layer where the Reynolds stress is domi­
nant. Neither of these is a complete solution, of course, but they at least 
represent simplifications of the overall problem compared with the more 
general velocity (95) which depends on two parameters. Moreover, further 
progress can be made with the apparently bold assumption that there exists 
an overlap region where both approximations are valid simultaneously—that 
is, where
f u y
U
u
f
y


(
/ )
/
( / ).
τ
τ
ν
δ
=
−
	
(101)
This seems at first to be an unjustifiable assumption, since the inner 
expression f1 has been derived by neglecting the Reynolds stress, whereas 
the outer function on the right side of (101) is assumed to hold if and 
only if the Reynolds stress is dominant. The principal justification for 
(101) is that it leads to conclusions that compare well with experiments, 
namely a logarithmic velocity profile that will be derived later. First, how­
ever, a mathematical justification for (101) can be found from the concept 
of matched asymptotic expansions. Thus, the inner approximation should 
hold when y/δ ≪ 1, and the outer approximation if uτy/ν ≫ 1. Can both 
these inequalities hold simultaneously for some suitable values of the dis­
tance from the wall y? In other words, can an intermediate value of y be 
found such that ν/uτ ≪ y ≪ δ? Clearly this is possible, provided ν/uτ ≪ δ or