s S = 2 / , (1) where S is the projected area of the lifting surface on the plane y = 0. The aspect ratio is an important measure of the effect of threedimensionality. A large aspect ratio implies that the flow will be nearly inde­ pendent of the transverse coordinate z, and a two-dimensional strip-theory approach is valid. This situation is exemplified by older aircraft wings, as well as by some hydrofoil configurations and deep narrow centerboards on

Chapter 5
small sailing craft. On the other hand, if the aspect ratio is smaller, as in the 
case of most rudders and control surfaces, three-dimensional flow effects 
will be important and must be included in our analysis.
Lifting surfaces of the type described are planar. Excluded from this cate­
gory is the screw propeller illustrated in figure 2.8. The results to be derived 
for planar foils are qualitatively applicable to the blades of a propeller. In 
particular, the two-dimensional theory can be used in a strip-theory sense 
to describe the flow past each section of a propeller blade, and the threedimensional flow past a propeller will include trailing vortex sheets similar 
to those existing in the planar case. The principal distinctions are that the 
propeller blades and associated vortex sheets are roughly helical, and the 
blades affect each other in a manner analogous to a cascade of planar foils 
operating in proximity. Detailed descriptions of propeller theory are given 
by Cox and Morgan (1972) and Kerwin (1973).
The case of two-dimensional flow past a lifting surface or hydrofoil will 
be considered first to provide a quantitative understanding of lifting sur­
faces of high aspect ratio, as well as qualitative understanding of the more 
general case. Subsequently, we shall consider the more complicated threedimensional case of finite aspect ratio planar lifting surfaces. Throughout 
our discussion we will assume that viscous effects are confined to a thin 
boundary layer along the surface of the hydrofoil and that the foil surface 
is itself thin and situated at a small angle of attack relative to the incident 
Figure 5.1
Three-dimensional lifting surface.

Lifting Surfaces 

flow. Thus, in the jargon of aerodynamics, we shall restrict our discussion 
to the case of linearized thin-wing theory.
5.1  Two-Dimensional Hydrofoil Theory
Let us consider the steady flow of fluid past a thin streamlined section 
asymmetrical about y = 0. This asymmetry may be due either to a small 
angle of attack a between the axis of the hydrofoil and the x-axis, or to the 
existence of curvature or camber of the hydrofoil, or to a combination of 
these two effects. Under these circumstances the streamlines will appear 
roughly as shown in figure 5.2. In particular, viscous effects are confined to 
a thin boundary layer adjacent to the surface of the foil, and the flow will 
leave the trailing edge in a smooth tangential manner.
For viscous effects to be confined to a thin boundary layer, not only 
must the Reynolds number be reasonably large but also the body must be 
sufficiently thin and streamlined that separation does not occur. If the body 
is not thin or if the angle of attack is too large, the flow will be typified by 
the sketches shown in figure 5.3. Thus, there are practical limits to both the 
body shape and the angle of attack.
The additional assumption that the flow leaves the trailing edge in a 
smooth tangential manner (as shown in figure 5.2) is fundamental to the 
theory of lifting surfaces. Another possibility that can be envisaged is shown 
in figure 5.4; this involves an infinite velocity around the trailing edge and 
a stagnation point on the upper (or possibly the lower) surface of the foil. 
In fact, the streamlines as drawn in figure 5.4 correspond to a potential flow 
without circulation, whereas the expected situation shown in figure 5.2 
Figure 5.2
Assumed flow past foil.