added moment of inertia for yaw acceleration, and ms denotes the cross-coupling added mass between sway and yaw. The latter vanishes if the body is symmetrical about x = 0. The superscript s in (42) is inserted to distinguish these strip-theory results. In this approximation, the local force at any section of the body is not affected by the shape of the body elsewhere; that is, there are no hydro­ dynamic interactions between adjacent sections of the body. The resulting

Chapter 7
simplification is significant. For example, the results for a slender spheroid 
can be deduced in terms of the added-mass coefficient for a circle with­
out the complexity of solving the complicated three-dimensional problems 
represented by figure 4.8. Of course, a price must be paid for this simplifica­
tion, and it is apparent from figure 4.8 that the sway added-mass coefficient 
will be overpredicted in the strip theory by a factor of 10 percent when the 
diameter-length ratio is 0.2, and by 100 percent in the extreme case of a 
sphere. A larger error results for the added moment of inertia, as empha­
sized by the fact that this coefficient vanishes for a sphere but is nonzero in 
the strip theory! (See problem 2.) It would be naive to suggest that a sphere 
is slender, and in general a diameter-length ratio of 0.1 to 0.2 is a reasonable 
upper limit for the slender-body approximation.
The total force acting on a slender body in steady motion can be derived 
by integrating the differential force (39),
F
U
x W x m
x dx
U W x m
x
z
l
x
x
T
N
=
∂
∂
=
∫
[
( )
( )]
[
( )
( )]
.


(43)
For a slender body, the nose is a point of zero transverse dimensions, and 
thus m33(xN) = 0. The same will be true at the tail for a pointed body, without 
a tail fin; in accordance with D’Alembert’s paradox, the lateral force acting 
on such a body in steady motion is zero.
For a body with a tail fin, such as that shown in figure 7.1, the situation 
is fundamentally different. Using the flat-plate result from table 4.3, the 
added-mass coefficient of the tail is given by
m
x
s
T



(
)
,
= π ρ
	
(44)
where s is the tail span. Using (19) to evaluate W, and denoting the slope 
∂ζ/∂x at the tail by the local angle of attack αT, it follows that there will be 
a transverse “lift” force
F
U s
z
T
= π ρ
α



. 	
(45)
The yaw moment about the vertical axis of the body can be obtained 
from (39) in a manner similar to that used to obtain the force. For steady 
motion, we obtain the following expression in place of (43):