resistance without recourse to Froude’s hypothesis. This approach is known as wave pattern analysis. A sig­ nificant feature of this technique is that the measured quantity A(θ) is lin­ ear in the ship’s disturbance, as compared to the quadratic wave resistance. By relating changes in the wave amplitude to changes in hull form, a linear optimization of the hull shape can be achieved more directly than is pos­ sible by studying the effects of shape on the total wave resistance.

Waves and Wave Effects 

The wave pattern analysis requires a relatively complex survey of the 
wake region to determine the amplitude function A(θ) for all relevant wave 
angles. By comparison, Froude’s approach only requires a simple measure­
ment of the total drag force on the model. Furthermore, the Froude approach 
accounts for the possibility of other contributions to the total resistance, 
such as the viscous form drag. Unless these additional contributions are 
Figure 6.18
Comparison of the wave resistance coefficient calculated from Michell’s integral 
(117) with the residual drag coefficient as measured from model tests. (From Graff, 
Kracht, and Weinblum 1964; reproduced by permission of the Society of Naval 
Architects and Marine Engineers)

Chapter 6
known or can be neglected, the wave resistance component as given by 
(115) is of limited interest from the standpoint of predicting the total drag 
on a full-scale ship.
On the other hand, the wave-pattern analysis is a valuable diagnostic 
tool, particularly when used with a measurement of the momentum defect 
in the viscous-wake region. These techniques have led to the discovery of 
an additional drag component associated with wave breaking, and to a bet­
ter understanding of the bulbous bows of supertankers and other ships with 
low Froude number.
In fine high-speed vessels such as destroyers and passenger liners, a bul­
bous bow promotes beneficial interference between the waves generated at 
different points along the length of the hull. Thus, for such vessels, the bow 
bulb reduces the wave resistance. Originally, bulbous bows of a similar form 
were fitted to supertankers on the basis of experimental measurements indi­
cating significant reductions in the total drag, but these reductions often 
exceed the total estimated wave resistance.
This apparent paradox has been reconciled by careful experimental mea­
surements of the wave-energy flux and of the momentum defect in the 
wake due to the viscous form drag. The latter measurement has revealed 
the existence of momentum associated with the breaking waves that are 
apparent in figures 6.16 and 6.17. Thus the wave-breaking resistance results 
from the breaking of waves near the ship, predominantly at the bow. The 
energy lost in this manner is convected downstream in the form of largescale turbulence or eddies.
For supertankers and similar vessels, the bulbous bow is effective in 
reducing the magnitude of the bow wave and thereby in avoiding wave 
breaking. For predicting the total drag, one may argue that it makes little 
difference whether the energy is wasted in wave radiation or in wave break­
ing, but only through an understanding of the mechanisms involved can 
the total drag be reduced intelligently and systematically.
An extensive discussion of wave-pattern analysis is given by Eggers, 
Sharma, and Ward (1967). More recent references on this topic and on 
wave-breaking resistance are contained in the symposium volume issued 
by the Society of Naval Architects of Japan (1976).