can be substi­ tuted for the source potential in (76–77) since (71) is valid for the contribu­ tion from the regular function H. Thus, with the Green function defined by (78), we can state that φ φ πφ πφ ∂ ∂ − ∂ ∂     = − −       ∫∫ G n G n dS x y z x y z S ( , , ) ( , , ) , (79)

Chapter 4
for (x, y, z) outside, on, or inside the closed surface S. The regular function 
H can be chosen to suit any additional boundary conditions that may be 
imposed. If a function H can be found with the property that
∂
∂
=
G
n
/

(80)
on the boundary surfaces of the fluid, the unknown term in the integrand 
of (79) vanishes. With this choice of the Green function, (79) provides an 
explicit solution for the potential in terms of the prescribed normal velocity 
on the boundaries. This Green function corresponds to the velocity poten­
tial of a source, in the presence of the appropriate fixed boundary surfaces 
of the problem. Unfortunately, this source potential is not known, except 
for some very simple body geometries.
One type of body geometry for which the source potential is known is 
the thin nonlifting planar surface that can be associated with a symmetrical 
thin hydrofoil at zero angle of attack and with a ship hull of small beam. For 
these situations the body surface is to first approximation a flat disc, and 
the source potential 1/r itself satisfies a condition of zero normal velocity 
on the disc, provided the source is situated on the disc. Thus, thin bodies of 
this type can be represented hydrodynamically by a center-plane distribu­
tion of simple sources, of strength proportional to the normal velocity on 
the body surface, provided only that the flow is symmetrical with respect 
to the center plane. This approximation forms the basis for two important 
topics: the use of a source distribution to represent the thickness effects of 
thin wings or hydrofoils, and the Michell theory for the wave resistance of 
thin ships.
4.12  Hydrodynamic Pressure Forces
One of the primary reasons for studying the fluid motion past a body is 
our desire to predict the forces and moments acting on the body due to 
the dynamic pressure of the fluid. Thus, we wish to consider the six com­
ponents of the force and moment vectors, which are represented by the 
integrals of the pressure over the body surface, or
F
n
= ∫∫p
dS
SB
, 	
(81)
M
r
n
=
×
∫∫p
dS
SB
(
)
. 	
(82)