scheme for calculating viscous effects, at least for unseparated flows at high Reynolds number; equally important, it gives a rationale for neglecting viscous stresses outside the boundary layer. More­ over, if the body is sufficiently regular in shape, its radii of curvature will be much larger than the boundary-layer thickness, and the local flow within the boundary layer will be effectively plane. Thus, if one imagines looking at the boundary-layer flow, say by enlarging it with a magnifying glass or

The Motion of a Viscous Fluid 

microscope, the details of the flow within this thin region will become vis­
ible, but the overall shape of the body is lost to view and the boundary of 
the body will appear practically flat within the region of view.
This approach leads us to expect that the most important and relevant 
viscous flow problem is the external flow past a single flat plate. This might 
be taken to coincide with the plane y = 0, as for the lower wall of the plane 
Couette flow, but with the fluid occupying the entire upper half-space 
y > 0. We might hope to obtain the desired result from the solution (27) 
of the corresponding problem for two plates, situated at y = 0 and y = h, 
simply by letting the separation distance h tend to infinity while focusing 
attention on the flow near the lower plate at y = 0. A cursory examination 
of equation (27) shows that this will not work, however. The solution for 
Couette flow is linear if driven by the movement of one plate and parabolic 
if driven by a pressure gradient. In either event the presence of the second 
boundary affects the flow near the first, and viscous effects persist through­
out the entire fluid.
This analogy suggests that for steady laminar flow past a single infinitely 
long flat plate, viscous effects will persist infinitely far away from the plate 
in the normal direction. In principle this is correct and should not be sur­
prising. Viscous effects are diffusive, and in this problem, diffusion has an 
infinite amount of time to take effect. This is not very useful in our quest 
for a boundary-layer theory where viscous effects are confined to a thin 
region, and in some sense we must remove the opportunity for diffusion to 
occur without limit in time and space.
Two possible modifications can be imposed to make this problem more 
realistic physically and to limit the time for viscous diffusion to occur. First, 
we might consider an unsteady problem where the time is limited by the 
duration of the motion. Alternatiyely, for steady-state flows, the length of 
the plate should be finite to limit the elapsed time during which a single 
particle of fluid is traveling past the plate. The latter problem is the most 
important and relevant one for us to consider, but it is also the more math­
ematically complicated. Thus, we shall first solve the unsteady problem for 
a plate of infinite length, which is not without some practical interest in 
any event.3