the velocity poten­ tial is of the form φ( ) / ( , ) [ ( ) ]. 1 2 x z f x F z h = + − (131) In the inner region, near the body surface, motions that are slowly vary­ ing in the longitudinal direction can be approximated as two-dimensional flows. If we restrict our attention to the low-frequency regime, as in sec­ tion 7.6, the inner solution is governed by the rigid free surface condition

Hydrodynamics of Slender Bodies 

∂ϕ/∂y = 0 on y = 0, and the same condition on the bottom y = h. Thus the 
inner flow is constrained by two parallel and closely spaced rigid boundar­
ies, as opposed to the unbounded case where the flow can spread radially 
in the y-z plane. This constraint is an essential feature of the inner flow and 
one of the principal effects of shallow water.
For lateral motions, the leading-order results for small ε can be con­
structed from a strip-theory synthesis, as in deep water (see problem 14). 
Thus, the sway added mass of a body in shallow water can be represented 
as in (40), but the relevant two-dimensional added-mass coefficient m22(x) 
is determined for the body section ∑B (x) and its rigid-body image, in a 
channel of total depth 2h. Some examples of the resulting two-dimensional 
added-mass coefficient are discussed in section 4.18. Typically, as in (4.157), 
the lateral added-mass coefficient is increased by proximity to the bottom.
The lateral maneuvers of ships in shallow water can be described as in 
sections 7.4 and 7.5 provided the two-dimensional added-mass coefficient 
is modified to account for shallow-water effects. As a result, ships are gener­
ally more stable in shallow water and more difficult to maneuver.
Lateral flows that can be described in the inner region without influence 
from the outer flow are not affected to leading order by wave effects or by 
the Froude number Fh. However, the strip-theory approach for lateral flows 
breaks down when the “gap” between the bottom of the fluid and the body 
is very small, resulting in a “blockage” of the lateral flow past the body sec­
tion. In the limit when this gap tends to zero (or the body runs aground!), 
the lateral flow must pass around the body ends, in a manner that is pre­
dominantly two-dimensional in the horizontal plane x-z, rather than in the 
lateral plane y-z.
The transition between these two regimes can be treated by a matching 
technique in which the outer flow is horizontal. Here, the extent to which 
the inner flow passes through the gap or around the body ends depends 
on the pressure jump between the two sides of the body, which depends 
in turn on the inner limit of the outer solution. This technique has been 
developed for the case Fh = 0 by Newman (1969) and extended to subcritical 
Froude numbers 0 < Fh < 1 by Breslin (1972). The same technique is applied 
to horizontal motions in a seaway by Beck and Tuck (1972).
For longitudinal flows, as in the case of an unbounded fluid treated 
in section 7.2, it is essential to match the source-like flow in the inner 
region with an outer three-dimensional solution. This matching procedure