that for sway or surge a similar expression holds with a multiplicative factor of one half. 13. For a two-dimensional floating body, show that a suitable linear com­ bination of heave and sway oscillations at the same frequency will result in outgoing waves only at x = ∞, with no waves at x = − ∞. By reversing the sign of time t, deduce that the corresponding body motions act to absorb an incident wave system with 100 percent efficiency.

Waves and Wave Effects 

14. Using the long-wave approximation (169) in conjunction with the 
exact result (173), obtain the first two nonvanishing terms in power-series 
expansions for the damping and exciting force, in powers of the frequency, 
for heaving motions in deep water. Compare these results with the exact 
calculations for a floating hemisphere shown in figure 6.24.
15. Consider the horizontal exciting force on a floating body in the shortwavelength limit λ/l ≪ 1. If the body surface is vertical at the intersec­
tion with the free surface, explain the fact that the body can be replaced 
by a vertical cylinder with the same waterplane and large depth. Use the 
standing wave solution (53) to estimate the sway exciting force on a twodimensional body for λ/l ≪ 1.
16. Show from the respective boundary conditions that the wavemaker 
problem, of a prescribed horizontal velocity along a vertical wavemaker, 
is equivalent to a heaving thin ship of suitable shape. Using this result, 
(181), and the equation shown in problem 11, prove that the amplitude of 
the waves generated by a paddle-type wavemaker with horizontal velocity 
U(y) cos ωt extending over the entire depth of deep water is given by
A
g
U y e
dy
ky
=
−∞∫


ω
( )
.
Show from this result that a two-dimensional wavemaker, consisting of a 
paddle that rotates with oscillatory velocity about a submerged pivot point, 
will not generate waves at infinity if the depth of the pivot is suitably cho­
sen in terms of the wavelength.
17. A vertical spar buoy of circular cylindrical form, draft T, and diameter d 
is freely floating. Compute the hydrostatic restoring forces and moments. 
Estimate the natural frequency in heave, assuming that the buoy is suf­
ficiently slender that the added mass and damping coefficients can be 
neglected by comparison to the mass of the buoy. Estimate the exciting 
force from the Froude-Krylov approximation, the damping coefficient from 
the Haskind relations, and compute the heave response. Compare your 
answer with the results shown in figure 2.16.
18. A spherical floating platform of diameter 50 m is ballasted to float on 
its equatorial plane and is unrestrained in a sea state corresponding to 
a 40 knot Pierson-Moskowitz spectrum. On the same scale of frequency, 
plot the heave response per unit wave amplitude from figure 6.24, the