h kh kx t = ∂ ∂ = + − φ ω ω sinh ( ) cosh sin( ). (26) Once again there is a phase difference of a quarter period between these two velocity components, but because the magnitudes are unequal, the tra­ jectories of fluid particles will be elliptical. The major axis of these ellipses is horizontal, and the velocity distribution is as shown in figure 6.2. Figure 6.7(a) is a time-exposure photograph that shows these trajectories vividly.

Waves and Wave Effects 

From (8) and (24) the phase velocity for finite depth can be expressed 
in the form
V
k
g
k
kh
p =
=
ω /
[(
/ )tanh
]
.
/
1 2 	
(27)
This tends to the deep-water limit (18) for kh ≫ 1. The opposite limit, 
kh ≪ 1, is the regime of shallow-water waves. In this case (27) can be approx­
imated using the Taylor series for the hyperbolic tangent, and the leadingorder approximation for the phase velocity is
V
gh
kh
p 
≪
(
)
,
.
/
1 2

(28)
The ratio of the phase velocity (27) to the infinite-depth limit (18) is plot­
ted in figure 6.3, together with the depth-wavelength ratio h/λ. For a fixed 
value of ω, it follows from (8) and (9) that Vp/Vp∞ = λ/λ∞. Both ratios increase 
monotonically from zero to one, with increasing depth. If h > 1
2 λ, the phase 
velocity and wavelength are essentially equal to their infinite-depth values. 
Dimensional plots of the phase velocity, period, and wavelength are given 
by Wiegel (1964) and Le Méhauté (1976).
In general, the phase velocity (27) depends on the wavenumber and the 
wavelength. Thus water waves are dispersive, as noted in section 2.3, with 
long waves traveling faster than shorter waves. The shallow-water limit (28) 
is an exception, where the phase velocity depends only on the depth, and 
the resulting wave motion is nondispersive.
Figure 6.2
Velocity field of a plane progressive wave in finite depth. The phase velocity and 
fluid velocity vectors are to the same scale. This example corresponds to the case 
A/λ = 1/20 and A/h = 1/5.

Chapter 6
For a fluid of nonuniform depth, these results can be applied locally, 
provided the change of depth is small over distances comparable to a wave­
length. If waves of constant frequency propagate from deep to shallow 
water, as at a beach, it follows from figure 6.3 that the wavelength and 
phase velocity will decrease. Figure 6.4 illustrates this phenomenon in a 
small wave tank.
6.4  Nonlinear Effects
In this section we shall consider briefly some of the simpler effects neglected 
in the linearized theory. First the nonlinear free-surface boundary condition 
Figure 6.3
Phase velocity, wavelength, and depth ratios of a plane progressive wave. The deepwater limiting values Vp∞ and λ∞ can be determined from equation (18).