speed, while the scattering component is linear in U. A complementary derivation of the exciting force (119) and moment (120) is given by Salvesen, Tuck, and Faltinsen (1970), assuming that k = O(ε−1) and using a generalization of the Haskind relations (6.172). In that approach the forced-motion potential Φ2 enters as a consequence of the Haskind relations, and as a function of the frequency of encounter instead of the wave frequency ω0. An alternative approach based on using the Haskind

Hydrodynamics of Slender Bodies 

relations in a two-dimensional manner is outlined by Newman (1970), and 
is more closely related to the present results. The Haskind relations lead 
to an exponential factor in the scattering-force integral of (116), in a form 
similar to the Froude-Krylov integral (108). This additional factor makes the 
scattering force more difficult to compute, since the force due to the scat­
tering potential cannot be related directly3 to the added-mass and damping 
coefficients.
These ambiguities are not the only uncertainties in the exciting force 
problem. In general, oscillatory integrals such as (119) and (120) will tend 
to cancel along the length of the ship, if the wavelength is short compared 
to the ship length, as assumed here. Under these circumstances such inte­
grals are dominated by local behavior near the ends. The importance of end 
effects is emphasized by Faltinsen (1973) in a study of the exciting force for 
the case where the incident wavelength is comparable to the ship’s beam 
and the forward velocity is small.
The strip theory for predicting heave and pitch is completed by add­
ing the body-mass and hydrostatic forces as given by (6.182–6.183) and 
(6.144–6.149), respectively. The result is a pair of coupled linear equations 
for the complex amplitudes of heave and pitch, analogous to (89–90). In 
solving these equations of motion the principal task is the computation of 
the two-dimensional added-mass and damping coefficients for each section 
of the ship.
Typical results are shown in figure 7.9 for a “Mariner” class ship. The 
calculations here are based on the exciting force and moment (119–120). 
Results using the complementary derivation of the exciting force and 
moment, given by Salvesen, Tuck, and Faltinsen (1970) and by Vugts 
(1970), show similar agreement with experiments.
It is apparent from figure 7.9 that the pitch and heave motions in head 
waves are predicted with sufficient accuracy for most practical purposes. 
Moreover, the regime of agreement with experiments is not limited to high 
frequencies in the vicinity of resonance, since the strip theory predicts the 
correct (hydrostatic) low-frequency limit of the exciting force and moment. 
Thus, as ω0 → 0, ξ2/A → 1 and |ξ6|l/(2A) ≃ ω0
2l/(2g), in agreement with the 
results shown in figures 7.7 and 7.8. As a result, the strip theory is useful 
over the complete range of frequencies of practical significance.