drag forces on a sailboat keel, assuming that the keel profile is one half of an ellipse with high aspect-ratio and that the bottom of the hull is a large flat plane coincident with the minor axis of the ellipse. 12. Write the complex potential of a pair of vortices, with opposite strengths, separated by a distance 2a. A free vortex in a fluid is generally assumed to be convected with the velocity of the fluid at the point where

Chapter 5
the vortex is situated. On this basis, what is the free motion of the vortex 
pair discussed above? What is the free motion if the two vortices have the 
same circulation?
13. A two-dimensional uncambered hydrofoil is pivoted about a point at 
distance d downstream from the leading edge. For what values of d is the 
hydrofoil statically stable at zero angle of attack? Discuss qualitatively the 
situation that would result if the pivot is further downstream.
14. An uncambered three-dimensional lifting surface with aspect ratio 
A = 5 experiences a lift coefficient of 0.4 at an angle of attack α = 5 degrees. 
What is the minimum induced drag coefficient in this condition and at 
α = 10 degrees?
15. A two-dimensional hydrofoil consists of a parabolic arc situated at an 
angle of attack, as in equation (43). Compare the lift and drag forces of this 
foil in the fully wetted and supercavitating conditions.
16. A hydrofoil set at an angle of attack of 7 degrees relative to the zero-lift 
angle moves through a wave system such that the unsteady component of 
the angle of attack is ±4 degrees. Compare the magnitudes of the mean and 
unsteady lift forces, assuming the hydrofoil travels a distance of five chord 
lengths in each period of oscillation.
References
Abbott, I. H., and A. E. von Doenhoff. 1959. Theory of wing sections. New York: 
Dover.
Abramowitz, M., and I. A. Stegun, eds. 1964. Handbook of mathematical functions. 
Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Acosta, A. J. 1973. Hydrofoils and hydrofoil craft. Annual Review of Fluid Mechanics 
5:161–184.
Barker, S. J., and T. M. Ward. 1976. Experiments on two- and three-dimensional cavitat­
ing hydrofoil models with and without flaps. California Institute of Technology, Gug­
genheim Aeronautical Laboratory report HSWT-1130.
Batchelor, G. K. 1967. An introduction to fluid dynamics. Cambridge: Cambridge Uni­
versity Press.
Bisplinghoff, R. L., H. Ashley, and R. L. Halfman. 1965. Aeroelasticity. Reading, Mass.: 
Addison-Wesley.