may result if the body geometry is modified to reduce the pressure, for instance, if the angle of attack of a hydrofoil is increased. The relevant nondimensional parameter describing the occurrence of cavitation and the details of the resulting flow is the cavitation number σ ρ = − p p U v . (156) Here p0 is the ambient pressure of the flow, usually at a large distance from the body, and pv is the vapor pressure of the fluid.

Lifting Surfaces 

Large cavitation numbers imply fully wetted flow, without cavitation. 
As the cavitation number is reduced or the angle of attack increased, local 
cavitation will occur first near the minimum-pressure position on the foil, 
initially in the form of small isolated bubbles of vapor. For smaller values of 
σ, the cavitation will become more widespread, and ultimately the flow will 
become supercavitating, with the entire suction side of the foil contained 
within the cavity, as shown in figure 5.23.
The lifting-surface theory outlined in the previous sections of this chap­
ter can be used to predict the initial occurrence of cavitation in terms of 
the minimum pressure on the foil. Subsequently, the cavitation bubbles 
may become sufficiently large to affect the flow, generally in an unsteady 
or unstable manner; in the ultimate supercavitating regime, however, the 
cavity is relatively large and stable, and its effects can be accounted for by 
a suitable generalization of lifting-surface theory. This procedure will be 
illustrated in sections 5.13 and 5.14 for steady two-dimensional flow past 
a symmetric wedge-shaped strut, as well as for the corresponding lifting 
problem.
Figure 5.23
Supercavitating flow past a two-dimensional foil. Here the lower surface of the foil is 
a circular arc, at 6° angle of attack, and the cavitation number σ = 0.19. (From Barker 
and Ward 1976)

Chapter 5
As in the fully wetted case, we assume that the foil and the cavity are 
thin. The boundary conditions are then linearized, as in section 5.2. On the 
wetted portion of the body, the kinematic boundary conditions (11–12) are 
unchanged. On the cavity, these are replaced by an appropriate dynamic 
boundary condition prescribing the fluid pressure to be equal to the vapor 
pressure. Using the linearized Bernoulli equation (14) and the cavitation 
number (156), the appropriate dynamic boundary condition on the cavity 
surface is given by
ρ
ρ
σ
uU
p
p
U
v
=
−
= −




, 	
(157)
or
u
U
= −1

σ. 	
(158)
Strictly speaking, the hydrostatic pressure contribution to Bernoulli’s equa­
tion cannot be neglected in (157) and will give rise to a buoyancy force 
acting on the cavity, but for sufficiently high speeds this effect is negligible 
and will be ignored here. The survey articles by Wu (1968, 1972) and Acosta 
(1973) discuss this and many other aspects of cavitation that are beyond 
the scope of our present treatment.
5.13  Symmetric Cavity Flows
As our first example we consider the flow past a symmetric strut with a 
blunt base, or trailing edge, as shown in figure 5.24. Here the coordinates 
have been nondimensionalized in terms of the chord length of the strut, 
with the leading edge at x = 1, and the nondimensional strut thickness is 
2y0(x). Downstream of the trailing edge, at x = 0, a cavity of length l exists 
with linearized pressure prescribed by (158). The resulting boundary con­
ditions are shown in figure 5.25. The problem statement is completed by 
requiring that Laplace’s equation must be satisfied in the fluid, the pertur­
bation velocity and pressure should vanish at infinity, and the velocity at 
the trailing edge of the foil is finite. The latter condition, like the Kutta 
condition for the fully wetted lifting foil, is necessary to ensure a smooth 
transition of the flow from the body surface to the cavity, with continuous 
slope between these two boundaries.