then in terms of the magnitude of k relative to the dimensions of the boundary layer. If k is small compared to the height of the viscous sublayer, the plate is effectively smooth and the frictional drag independent of k. In the other extreme, if k is large compared to δ, the boundary layer will be unimportant by comparison to the form drag resulting from the roughness elements, which in turn will be essen­ tially independent of the Reynolds number.

The Motion of a Viscous Fluid 

For a fixed scale of roughness, in terms of the characteristic length l of 
the plate, k/l = constant. In this case the frictional drag is identical to that of 
a smooth plate below a Reynolds number which depends on the roughness 
ratio; above this point, the frictional drag is effectively constant, as shown 
in figure 3.12. From this result we can infer that smoothness of a full-scale 
ship hull is much more important than smoothness of its model, for if the 
two had the same relative roughness or equal values of k/l, the effects of the 
roughness would increase with Reynolds number.
On the other hand, for constant values of the Reynolds number based 
on the roughness scale, Uk/v, corresponding to k/δ = constant, there is a 
family of curves approximately parallel to the smooth curve. The latter are 
more representative of the ship roughness, insofar as the roughness scale of 
ship hulls of different lengths is effectively independent of the length. In 
this sense a roughness allowance can be approximated by a constant additive 
resistance coefficient such as 0.0004, as discussed in chapter 2.
Figure 3.12
Resistance formula of sand-roughened plate; coefficient of total skin friction. (From 
Schlichting 1968)

Chapter 3
3.21  Turbulent Boundary Layers: Closing Remarks
Semiempirical methods have been developed for analyzing the effects of a 
pressure gradient. A critique of this subject is given by Thompson (1967). 
Qualitatively, the effects of the pressure gradient are analogous to the case 
of a laminar boundary layer. In particular, negative and positive values of 
the pressure gradient in a streamwise direction along the body surface are 
respectively favorable and unfavorable for the stability of a thin boundary 
layer, as compared with the occurrence of separation. Turbulence serves the 
useful role of convecting more momentum from the free stream into the 
boundary layer, by comparison with the laminar case, and thus the separa­
tion point is delayed. In this connection, we recall the drag coefficient of 
a sphere, shown in figure 2.2, which is decreased by the effects of turbu­
lence at the transition Reynolds number of approximately 400,000. Similar 
remarks apply to the development of separation or stall on lifting surfaces; 
even in the normal regime of small angles of attack, the pressure gradient 
can significantly affect the turbulent boundary layer.
Semiempirical extensions of the turbulent boundary-layer theory have 
been developed to account for the presence of external pressure gradients 
and of three-dimensional effects. Extensive discussion of these topics is 
given in the monograph by Cebeci and Smith (1974). Applications to the 
calculation of the viscous drag on a ship hull are discussed by Huang and 
von Kerczek (1972) and Kux (1974).
Problems
1. The Couette flow shown in figure 3.3 is a rough model for the flow in a 
lubricated bearing. Find the bearing friction per unit area, in terms of the 
viscosity of the lubricant and the gap width of the bearing. How does the 
bearing friction change if there is a pressure gradient in the direction of 
motion?
2. The simplest equation of motion for the spar buoy shown in figure 2.16 
is mÿ + ρgS0(y − A cos ωt) = 0 where y(t) is the heave amplitude, S0 is the 
waterplane area, and A is the wave amplitude. Use the solution in section 
3.13 for sinusoidal motion of a flat plate to derive a linear damping coef­
ficient proportional to the submerged area of the cylindrical portion of the 
spar buoy. Using this estimate of the damping coefficient, find the resonant