number, find the atmop­ sheric pressure in a “vacuum towing tank” necessary to produce the same cavitation number. Assume the temperature range 0–30°C, with the worst possible temperature full scale and the best possible temperature in the towing tank. 10. A model of a sailing yacht is towed with a small angle of attack, or leeway angle, about the vertical axis. The drag force and side force are measured separately. If the yacht hull operating in this manner can be

Chapter 2
regarded as a vertical hydrofoil in the presence of the free surface, what 
are the appropriate scaling laws to apply to each force component? Distin­
guish between parameters that should be scaled in principle and those that 
would be most important in a model test. In fresh water (15°C), towingtank tests of a model 2 m long with wetted-surface area 1.5 m2 give a 
measured drag force of 10 N and a side force of 28 N at a speed of 1.4 m/s. 
What are the corresponding full-scale results for a yacht 10 m long in salt 
water (15°C)?
11. Construct a simple mathematical model for the propulsive equilibrium 
of a canoe, assuming the canoe velocity Uc and paddle velocity Up are con­
stants. If these velocities are both defined relative to the surrounding water, 
show that the propulsive efficiency is
η =
+
=
+ 









−
U
U
U
SC
SC
c
c
p
D c
D
p

1 2

(
)
(
)
/
where (SCD)c,p is the product of the area and the drag coefficient for the 
canoe or paddle respectively. How does the efficiency depend on the size 
of the paddle?
12. A submerged spherical body of volume 0.5 m3 and density equal to 
half the density of water is moored in the deep ocean with a taut vertical 
cable 1000 m long. Neglecting all hydrodynamic forces, but including the 
upward buoyancy force on the body, find the tension in the cable and the 
natural period of this inverted pendulum. Comment on how the unsteady 
force in section 2.11 would affect this period. Estimate the horizontal excur­
sion of the buoy and the angle of the mooring cable in a steady current of 
0.5 knots.
13. Resonant strumming of a taut cable with circular cross-section is 
observed at a flow velocity of 10 knots perpendicular to the cable. The 
diameter of the cable is 2 cm. What is the natural frequency of the cable? Is 
this situation likely to become more serious at higher speeds?
14. For an oscillatory flow U(t) = Aω sin ωt, normal to a circular cylinder of 
diameter d, find the ratio A/d such that the viscous and inertial forces in 
Morison’s equation (50) are equal. Assume that the added mass m11 is equal 
to the displaced mass and that the drag coefficient based on the diameter 
is equal to 1.0.