forward speed, but a strip-theory approach will be discussed in chapter 7. 6.20 Ocean Waves The complexity of ambient wave motions in the ocean is evident to any­ one who has observed them either from the beach or the deck of a ship. The wave patterns are ever-changing with time and space, in a manner that appears to defy analysis. This complexity is partly the result of disper­ sion, which already has been discussed in the context of deterministic wave

Chapter 6
motions generated by well-defined processes. Ship waves are an example 
where the uniformity of the resulting wave system is itself the most striking 
feature of all.
Ambient waves on the surface of the ocean are not only dispersive, but 
random. The generating mechanism is, predominantly, the effect upon the 
water surface of wind in the atmosphere. The wind is itself random, espe­
cially when viewed from the standpoint of the turbulent fluctuations and 
eddies which are important in generating waves. The randomness of ocean 
waves is subsequently enhanced by their propagation over large distances 
in space and time and their exposure to the random nonuniformities of 
the water and air. Thus ocean waves must be described in a probabilistic 
manner.
Despite their randomness, ocean waves can be modeled by a suitable 
distribution of plane progressive waves of all possible frequencies and 
directions, as in the double integral (59) where the wave motion is defined 
uniquely by the complex amplitude A(ω, θ). In a deterministic problem 
with finite energy, this amplitude function can be found by Fourier tech­
niques, for example, in terms of prescribed values of the wave elevation 
along the free surface, at some initial instant of time.
For random ocean waves this approach must be modified. First, the 
required initial data cannot be measured everywhere on the free surface. 
In addition, Fourier theory requires the function to be represented, that is, 
η(x, z, t), to be square-integrable over the entire domain, in this case the free 
surface. Ambient ocean waves do not vanish anywhere on the free surface, 
and while their features may be noticeably different at widely separated 
points in the ocean, an integral such as 
η
2 dxdz
−∞
∞∫∫
 will be finite only in 
the sense that the area of the oceans is limited.
Faced with a dilemma of whether the area of the oceans is finite or infi­
nite, we find it appropriate to consider the length-scale and time-scale of 
interest to us in our description of the ocean-wave environment. In the con­
text of ocean engineering and naval architecture, our interest is to describe 
the response of vessels and structures with dimensions comparable to a few 
hundred meters, at the most, and with characteristic response times on the 
order of a few seconds or, in extreme cases, minutes.
For this purpose, it should suffice to describe the wave environment 
over a small portion of the oceans, say on the order of tens or hundreds of 
kilometers squared. We have no interest in predicting simultaneously the