moving along the x-axis with velocity Vp secθ. The restriction (87) can be used to eliminate one of the variables of inte­ gration in (86). Retaining the wave angle θ, and noting that (87–88) require that cosθ > 0, we can replace (86) by the single integral η θ θ θ θ θ π π ( , ) Re ( )exp[ ( )( cos sin )]; / / x z d A ik x z = − + −∫ (89)

Waves and Wave Effects 

for the deep-water case, from (17) and (87),
k
g U
( )
/
cos
.
θ
θ
=


(90)
The corresponding expression for finite depth follows from (24), in combi­
nation with (87). In either case, the velocity potential corresponding to (89) 
is of the same general form and can be inferred from (16) or (23).
The expression (89) is known as the free-wave distribution of a given ship. 
This is characterized by the amplitude and phase of the complex function 
A(θ); here A(θ) takes a role analogous to that of the constant A in section 
6.9. Thus energy arguments can be used to express the wave resistance in 
terms of the function A(θ), which depends on the shape of the ship hull 
and its forward velocity. This reduction will be deferred to section 6.12.
If the distance downstream from the position of the ship is very large, 
the integral (89) can be simplified and the classical ship-wave pattern will 
be obtained, as derived by Kelvin in 1887. Strictly speaking this asymptotic 
approximation should be based upon the stationary-phase approximation 
of section 6.11. However, the Kelvin wave pattern is of sufficient interest 
that a heuristic argument will be used in the interim, based on the concept 
of the group velocity.
We recall from section 6.7 that in two dimensions wave groups travel 
with the group velocity Vg = dω/dk. Since the free-wave distribution (89) 
appears locally as a slowly varying two-dimensional wave system, the 
same result should hold here. Thus if x′ is a local coordinate, normal to 
the wave crests as in figure 6.6 and defined with respect to a fixed refer­
ence frame, the significant waves will travel in groups such that x′/t = Vg is 
determined by
d
dk kx
t
(
)
.
′ −
=
ω

(91)
If this expression for the derivative of the phase of the local waves is trans­
formed into the frame of reference of (89), the significant waves will satisfy 
the equation
d
dk k
x
z
[ ( )( cos
sin )]
.
θ
θ
θ
+
= 0 	
(92)
Since k and θ are related by (90), the vanishing of (92) is equivalent to 
the condition