the body does not affect this analy­ sis, and a trailing vortex sheet may originate from the abrupt trailing edge at the tail. From the viewpoint of lifting-surface theory, this vortex sheet is associated directly with the lift force (45). These results can be applied to planar lifting surfaces of small aspect ratio, where the body profile ∑B is a flat plate of local span s(x), provided no vorticity is shed upstream of the tail. This restriction requires the trailing

Chapter 7
edge to be abrupt and situated at the tail. In addition, the angle of attack 
must be sufficiently small to avoid leading-edge separation. Under these 
conditions, the results above reduce to the low aspect ratio lifting-surface 
theory. In the notation of chapter 5, the lift coefficient follows from (45) 
in the form
C
A
L = 1
2 π α, 	
(48)
where A = s2/S is the aspect ratio based on the maximum span and planform 
area S. As shown in figure 5.22, (48) gives precisely half the limiting value, 
for A ≪ 1, of the lifting-line theory (5.148). This difference is not surpris­
ing, since the lifting-line theory assumes that A ≫ 1.
The longitudinal distribution of the lift force on an uncambered lifting 
surface of small aspect ratio is proportional to the rate of change of added 
mass. For a “delta wing” with triangular planform, the lift force will be dis­
tributed uniformly along the length. If the span increases more rapidly, the 
center of pressure will move forward. In the limiting case of a rectangular 
planform, with constant span along the length, the lift force will be con­
centrated at the leading edge, with a differential lift given by
′ =
−
F
U
s
x
x
z
N
π ρ
α
δ


2 (
), 	
(49)
where δ(x − xN) denotes a delta function. This limit is physically unreason­
able, but experiments show that the center of pressure for a rectangular 
lifting surface of small aspect ratio is very close to the leading edge, particu­
larly in the regime of small angles of attack where leading-edge separation 
does not occur.
For a planar lifting surface of small aspect ratio with the maximum span 
at the tail, the trailing vortex sheet downstream of the body must be inde­
pendent of the coordinate x, with a constant downwash velocity equal to 
UαT, Thus, it makes no difference whether the body terminates at the posi­
tion of maximum span or continues downstream with decreasing span, 
provided the local angle of attack is constant. For this reason, the low aspect 
ratio theory holds for uncambered lifting surfaces of more general planform, 
if the maximum span is used in (48). In this particular case, there is no lift 
force on the portion of the body downstream of the maximum span.