and what is their wavelenth? Assuming the back edge of this wave system is sharp, separating a region of calm water from the region of the transverse waves, how many waves exist in the towing tank at the time the model is stopped? How many waves will ultimately move past the model after it has stopped? 8. Waves of period five seconds are incident upon a gradually shoaling beach in a two-dimensional manner. At what depth will the wave height

Chapter 6
be a minimum? If the wave height 2A in deep water is 1 m and if the waves 
break when the depth is equal to the local wave height, what is the wave 
height when breaking commences? Explain why regular waves incident 
upon a beach from an oblique angle must appear steady-state to an observer 
moving along the beach at a suitable velocity, for all depths. Show from this 
that the waves are refracted toward the beach; that is, show that the wave 
crests become more nearly parallel to the beach as the depth decreases.
9. Show that a round homogeneous log is neutrally stable, with respect to 
static roll about its axis, for any density such that it will float. Show that 
the position of stable equilibrium of a square homogeneous log depends 
on its density.
l0. A rectangular barge of length 100 m, beam 20 m, and draft 8 m is assumed 
to have an added mass equal to its displaced mass. Find the resonant wave­
length for heave if the barge is moored with a slack mooring cable.
11. From energy conservation, show that the damping coefficient of a twodimensional body symmetrical about x = 0 is related to the amplitude Ai 
of the far-field waves, generated by its motion in deep water, by the equation
b
g
A
ii
i
i
= ρ
ω
ξ



.
Substitute this result in (172) and carry out the vertical integration at infin­
ity to derive the two-dimensional version of the Haskind relations in the 
form (174).
12. Using (173), show that the heave damping coefficient of a body of revo­
lution with vertical axis is equal to
b
k
gV
X
g




=
ρ
.
Show that for sway or surge a similar expression holds with a multiplicative 
factor of one half.
13. For a two-dimensional floating body, show that a suitable linear com­
bination of heave and sway oscillations at the same frequency will result 
in outgoing waves only at x = ∞, with no waves at x = − ∞. By reversing the 
sign of time t, deduce that the corresponding body motions act to absorb 
an incident wave system with 100 percent efficiency.