−ϕ2, is a homogeneous solution with zero normal derivative on the boundary surface S and also a solution of Laplace’s equation throughout the fluid volume . By a wellknown consequence of the divergence theorem (3.5), φ φ φ φ φ φ φ φ φ φ ∂ ∂ = ∇ ⋅ = ∇⋅ ∇ = ∇⋅∇+ ∇ ∫∫ ∫∫ ∫∫∫ ∫∫∫ n dS d d d S S ( ) ( ) [ ] . S     (29)

Chapter 4
Under the specified conditions, substituting the potential ϕ3 gives



=
∇
⋅∇
∫∫∫(
)
.
φ
φ d

	
(30)
Since the integrand of this volume integral is positive definite, it must 
vanish everywhere throughout the fluid. Hence there is no fluid motion if 
there is no normal velocity on the boundaries, and the potential ϕ3 can be 
at most a constant.
From this uniqueness proof it follows that the kinematic boundary con­
dition (28) contains precisely the right amount of information regarding 
the fluid motion. To prescribe more information on the boundaries would 
be to overspecify the solution. On the other hand, there will be problems 
where the position and velocity of the boundary are unknown, in par­
ticular on the free surface where waves occur and the form of the wave 
motion, and free surface elevation, is not known a priori. In this instance 
the kinematic boundary condition (28) remains valid, but the velocity U 
of the boundary is unknown. Additional information must be provided, 
and the physically relevant condition is that the pressure on the free sur­
face is equal to atmospheric pressure. Thus the dynamic boundary condi­
tion is based on Bernoulli’s equation (26), with the pressure p prescribed. 
Further discussion of this situation is deferred until we discuss free-surface 
flows in chapter 6.
4.5  Simple Potential Flows
The simplest example of ideal fluid motion is the uniform stream, say with 
velocity U flowing in the x-direction. The velocity potential of this flow is 
clearly ϕ = Ux. More generally the components of similar streaming flows in 
the y- and z-directions can be superposed to obtain the velocity potential 
ϕ = Ux + Vy + Wz. This potential is a solution of Laplace’s equation (16), and 
operating with the gradient (15) confirms that this is indeed the potential 
of a flow with velocity components (U, V, W).
This streaming flow will be disturbed by the presence of a body or bod­
ies or of some other type of boundary geometry such as the variable form 
of a flow channel. From the mathematical viewpoint such a disturbance 
requires the introduction of singularities; the simplest of these are the source 
potential and its compatriot, the sink. Since these singularities are literally a