the streaming flow at infinity is positive downward with magnitude equal to 1/2. Transforming to the ζ-plane requires that (53) be substituted in (55). Thus the complex potential for flow normal to the flat plate is given by F i i i ( ) [ ( ) ] [ ( ) ] ( ) . / / / ζ ζ ζ ζ ζ ζ = + − − + − = − − 1 2 1 2 1 2 (56)

Chapter 4
In the ζ-plane the complex velocity is F'(ζ), and at infinity (56) gives a 
downward streaming velocity of unit magnitude past the horizontal plate. 
The complex potential can be multiplied by any real constant to change 
the value of the stream velocity; for the general case of flow at normal inci­
dence with stream velocity U, past a flat plate of width 2a, the appropriate 
generalization of (56) is
F
iU
a
( )
(
)
.
/
ζ
ζ
=
−

2 1 2 	
(57)
Differentiating (57) gives the complex velocity
u
iv
iU
a
−
=
−
ζ
ζ
(
)
.
/

2 1 2
	
(58)
As in the case of the flow around a semi-infinite flat plate, the velocity is 
infinite at the sharp edges with a square-root singularity. More generally 
one can expect the singular behavior of the flow near a sharp corner to 
depend only on the local shape near the corner.
Since the general conformal mapping (51) maps concentric circles in the 
z-plane onto confocal ellipses in the ζ-plane, the flow past an ellipse can be 
obtained in a similar manner.
Certain fundamental characteristics of conformal mapping transforma­
tions that we have taken for granted should be stated explicitly. The fol­
lowing three properties apply to any conformal transformation given by an 
analytic function:
1.	
The mapping is one-to-one, so that to each point in the physical 
domain, there is one and only one corresponding point in the mapped 
domain.
2.	
Closed curves map to closed curves.
3.	
Angles are preserved between the intersections of any two lines in the 
physical domain and in the mapped domain.
The last property obviously is violated in the case of the flat plate, at the 
two ends of the plate, because the mapping function is not analytic at these 
points. This feature is exploited in the Schwarz-Christoffel transformation, 
where polygonal profiles of arbitrary form are mapped onto a straight line, 
utilizing products of corner mappings analogous to (50). An extensive treat­
ment of conformal mapping is given by Milne-Thomson (1968).
Finally, the Riemann mapping theorem, which states that an arbitrary 
closed profile can be mapped onto the unit circle, enables the solution for