Lewis, E. V. 1967. The motion of ships in waves. In Principles of naval architecture, ed. J. P. Comstock, 607–717. New York: Society of Naval Architects and Marine Engineers. Mair, W. A., and D. J. Maull. 1971. Bluff bodies and vortex shedding—A report on Euromech 17. Journal of Fluid Mechanics 45:209–224. Milgram, J. H. 1976. Waves and wave forces. In Proceedings of the conference on the behaviour of offshore structures (BOSS ’76). pp. 11–38. Trondheim: The Norwegian Institute of Technology.

Chapter 2
Prandtl, L. 1927. The generation of vortices in fluids of small viscosity. Journal of the 
Royal Aeronautical Society 31:720–741.
Roshko, A. 1961. Experiments on the flow past a circular cylinder at very high Reyn­
olds number. Journal of Fluid Mechanics 10:345–356.
Sarpkaya, T. 1966. Separated flow about lifting bodies and impulsive flow about 
cylinders. J. American Institution of Aeronautics and Astronautics 4:414–420.
Sedov, L. I. 1959. Similarity and dimensional methods in mechanics. New York: 
Academic Press.
Söding, H., and F. U. Häusler. 1976. Minimization of vertical motions of floating 
structures. In Proceedings of the conference on the behaviour of offshore structures (BOSS 
’76). pp. 307–319. Trondheim: The Norwegian Institute of Technology.
Todd, F. H. 1967. Resistance and propulsion. In Principles of naval architecture, ed. 
J. P. Comstock, 228–462. New York: Society of Naval Architects and Marine 
Engineers.
Troost, L., and A. Zakay. 1954. A new evaluation of the Lucy Ashton ship model and 
full scale tests. International Shipbuilding Progress 1:5–9.
van Lammeren, W. P. A., L. Troost, and J. G. Konig. 1948. Resistance, propulsion and 
steering of ships. Haarlem, Netherlands: H. Starn.
van Lammeren, W. P. A., J. D. van Manen, and M. W. C. Oosterveld. 1969. The 
Wageningen B-screw series. Society of Naval Architects and Marine Engineers Transac­
tions 77:269–317.
Venning, E., and W. L. Haberman. 1962. Supercavitating propeller performance. 
Society of Naval Architects and Marine Engineers Transactions 70:354–417.
Vossers, G. 1962. Behaviour of ships in waves. Haarlem, Netherlands: H. Stam.
Wachnik, Z. G., and E. E. Zarnick. 1965. Ship motion prediction in realistic shortcrested seas. Society of Naval Architects and Marine Engineers Transactions 73:100–134.

3  The Motion of a Viscous Fluid
Chapter 

The 
Motion 
of 
a 
Viscous 
Fluid
© Massachusetts Institute of TechnologyAll Rights Reserved
To develop analytical representations for the flow of a viscous fluid, it is 
necessary first to describe the properties of the flow, especially the velocity 
field, and the relevant forces that act on the fluid particles. Subsequently, 
the physical laws expressing conservation of mass and momentum must 
be invoked, in terms of this description, to derive the governing equations 
of the flow. In addition, the role of viscosity must be described by a suit­
able hypothesis that relates the stresses between adjacent fluid particles to 
the kinematic description of their relative motion. In this manner we shall 
derive the equations of motion for a viscous fluid, as a system of coupled 
nonlinear partial differential equations. These words may sound frighten­
ing to those not well trained in advanced calculus, and still greater appre­
hension will be felt by the opposite group who recognize that such a system 
of equations generally does not possess simple solutions. Of course, most 
fluid flows are not simple, so we must expect the governing equations to be 
somewhat complicated.
Because of this complexity, we will restrict our discussion to very sim­
ple flows, particularly those involving infinitely long, flat, or cylindrical 
boundary surfaces. These flows are of limited direct applicability, but they 
will give us a qualitative “feel” for the role of viscosity and an important 
quantitative tool in the form of boundary-layer theory. The importance of 
viscosity for many problems of engineering interest is confined to a thin 
layer adjacent to boundary surfaces. Furthermore, if the radii of curvature 
of these surfaces are large compared to the boundary-layer thickness, the 
flow will appear locally plane in the boundary layer.
There are exceptions to this convenient state of affairs; for example, in 
low-Reynolds-number flows, the role of viscosity is not confined to a thin 
boundary layer. This situation would hold for bodies of microscopic size, as