velocВӯ ity on or near the real axis will come from the immediate vicinity of the source. Near this point, the net outward flux away from the real axis must equal the source strength, in agreement with (57). On the other hand, the source will induce a horizontal velocity all along the real axis, of magniВӯ tude inversely proportional to the distance x вҲ’ Оҫ and thus a distribution of sources will give a total horizontal velocity consistent with (56).

Lifting SurfacesвҖҒ

For the vortex distribution (55), the velocity components on the cut are 
given by
u
x
x
Вұ
=
( )
( ),
вҲ“1
2 Оі
	
(59)
v
x
d
x
Вұ
вҲ’
= вҲ’
вҲ’
( )
( )
.




ПҖ
Оі Оҫ
Оҫ
Оҫ
вҲ’вҲ«
	
(60)
The same pair of equations was derived earlier (29вҖ“30) using real variВӯ
ables. The conjugate nature of these results is apparent, relative to (56вҖ“57). 
In particular, the velocity components (u, v) of a source distribution are 
identical to the conjugate pair (v, вҲ’u) of the vortex distribution, except for 
the change in notation of the singularity strength. Thus, in the lifting probВӯ
lem, the local vortex strength Оі can be related to the jump in tangential 
velocity at the same point on the mean-camber line, but not to the normal 
velocity.
5.7вҖғ Singular Integral Equations
To solve the lifting problem with prescribed foil geometry or a given v(x) on 
the cut, it is necessary to determine the vortex strength Оі from the integral 
equation (60). Physically, each vortex element along the cut contributes to 
the net vertical velocity at any other point on the cut, and the problem is to 
find the appropriate distribution of vortices that induce a prescribed value 
of v(x). Equation (60) is a singular integral equation because the kernel, or 
known part of the integrand, is singular.
The literature on the solution of singular integral equations is extensive; 
see, for example, the monograph of Muskhelishvili (1953) and a section 
in the text by Carrier, Krook, and Pearson (1966). Here we shall construct 
the solution in a manner that exploits our physical understanding of the 
thickness problem and the conjugate nature of the source and vortex 
distributions.
Figure 5.14 indicates the linearized boundary-value problem appropriВӯ
ate to each physical situation. The vertical velocity component v+ denotes 
the normal velocity on the upper surface of each body, which is assumed 
known from the boundary conditions (20вҖ“21). From the appropriate symВӯ
metries, v(x, y) is an odd function of y in the thickness problem, and hence 
in this case v(x, 0) = 0 on the real axis outside the cut. Conversely, for the