H. Milgram, Owen H. Oakley, Jr., and Ronald W Yeung of MIT; Keith P. Kerney, Choung M. Lee, and Nils Salvesen of the David Taylor Naval Ship Research and Development Cen­ ter; Robert F. Beck and T. Francis Ogilvie of the University of Michigan; T. Yao-tsu Wu of the California Institute of Technology; Odd Faltinsen of the Norwegian Technical University; P. Thomas Fink of the University of New South Wales; and Ernest O. Tuck of the University of Adelaide. Former

Preface 
xxi
students who have been particularly helpful in a variety of ways include 
Elwyn S. Baker, Charles N. Flagg, George S. Hazen, Ki-Han Kim, James H. 
Mays, and Paul J. Shapiro.
The original illustrations are from the talented pen of Lessel Mansour. 
The manuscript was typed with proficiency by Jan M. Klimmek, Jacqueline 
A. Sciacca, and Kathy C. Barrington. My wife Kathleen helped with many 
editorial tasks and has patiently endured the diversion of my time.

1  Introduction
Chapter 

I
n
t
r
o
d
u
c
t
i
o
n
© Massachusetts Institute of TechnologyAll Rights Reserved
The applications of hydrodynamics to naval architecture and ocean engi­
neering cover many separate topics and range over a broad level of sophis­
tication. The topics are as diverse as the propulsion and steering of ships 
and the behavior in waves of a moored buoy or oil-drilling platform. 
The former are classical problems of naval architecture, predated only 
by Archimedean hydrostatics. The buoy and platform problems are more 
recent from the standpoint of scientific and engineering analyses. The 
degree of sophistication varies from empirical design methodology to the­
oretical research activities whose justification is based on long-range hopes 
of application.
The fields of technology are also diverse, and to solve these problems 
requires a knowledge not only of fluid mechanics but also of solid mechan­
ics (to describe the mooring system especially), control theory (to represent 
the mechanical and human systems involved), as well as statistics and ran­
dom processes (to deal with the highly irregular environment of the ocean). 
Here we shall focus our attention specifically on the hydrodynamic aspects, 
emphasizing those unique to this field as opposed to the other engineering 
disciplines where fluid mechanics is applicable.
Faced with the choice between empirical design information and esoteric 
theory, we will follow a middle course to provide the necessary background 
for an intelligent evaluation and application of empirical procedures and 
also serve as an introduction to more specialized study on the research end 
of the spectrum. This approach has the advantage of being a compromise 
between two viewpoints, which sometimes appear to conflict; it also uni­
fies the seemingly diverse problems of marine hydrodynamics by exam­
ining them not as separate problems but instead as related applications 
of the general field of hydrodynamics. For example, propellers, rudders,