drag, one may argue that it makes little difference whether the energy is wasted in wave radiation or in wave break­ ing, but only through an understanding of the mechanisms involved can the total drag be reduced intelligently and systematically. An extensive discussion of wave-pattern analysis is given by Eggers, Sharma, and Ward (1967). More recent references on this topic and on wave-breaking resistance are contained in the symposium volume issued by the Society of Naval Architects of Japan (1976).

Waves and Wave Effects 

6.15  Body Response in Regular Waves
A subject of great interest to ocean engineers and naval architects is the 
effect suffered by a floating or submerged vessel in the presence of ocean 
waves. The types of bodies of importance here include fixed structures and 
freely floating vessels, as well as the intermediate category of moored ves­
sels. The most common responses of concern are the oscillatory motions of 
a free body or the structural loading imposed upon a fixed body.
In the simplest case it may be assumed that the waves incident upon the 
body are plane progressive waves of small amplitude, with sinusoidal time 
dependence. The results we will obtain about bodies in regular waves are 
not without physical interest, but their practical value might be questioned 
given the highly irregular nature of actual waves in the ocean. Fortunately, 
these two topics are connected by the description of irregular waves as a 
linear superposition of sinusoidal components. The actual ocean environ­
ment is most realistically described as a random process, which causes a 
random response of the body. These random motions will be described 
in sections 6.20 and 6.21, after we have dealt first with the problem of 
regular waves.
Plane progressive waves were analyzed in sections 6.2 and 6.3 on the 
assumption that the wave amplitude is sufficiently small to justify linear­
ization. The same assumption is made here, not only to be consistent with 
the description of the incident waves, but also to permit superposition of 
different facets of the wave-body interaction in regular waves and ulti­
mately to justify the superposition of these to represent the more realistic 
motions in irregular waves.
In the problem to be treated here, plane progressive waves of amplitude 
A and direction θ are incident upon the body, which moves in response to 
these waves with six degrees of freedom as illustrated in figure 6.19. Follow­
ing the indicial notation used in chapter 4, we define three translational 
motions parallel to (x, y, z) = (x1, x2, x3) as surge, heave, and sway, and three 
rotational motions about the same axes as roll, yaw, and pitch, respectively. 
The corresponding velocities Uj(t) will be sinusoidal in time, with the same 
frequency as the incident waves, and thus
U t
i
e
j
j
j
i t
( )
Re(
),
, ,
, .
=
=
ωξ
ω
1 2

…
	
(118)