upwash of the gust on the foil. Thus, if the foil is fixed, the results obtained in sections 5.15 and 5.16. can be utilized for the gust problem simply by setting v0 = −vg. We shall restrict our attention here to gusts that are sinusoidal functions of x + Ut, and thus steady with respect to the free stream. If α0 is the ampli­ tude of the resulting change in angle of attack, vg can be written in the form

Chapter 5
v
x
t
U
e
g
ikx i t
( , , )
Re{
}.


=
+
α
ω
	
(228)
Substituting this quantity for −v0 in (220) and evaluating the resulting inte­
grals in terms of the Bessel functions J0 and J1 gives the lift force in the form
L
U
e
i
k
H
k
iH
k
i t
= −
+














ρ
α
π
ω
Re
/
( )
( )
.
( )
( )
	
(229)
The quantity in brackets in (229) is the Sears function, which is plotted in 
figure 5.34. For large argument k, the Hankel functions in the denominator 
oscillate proportionally to e−ik, and thus the phase of (229) varies rapidly, as 
indicated in figure 5.34. This can be avoided if the phase of the sinusoidal 
gust is measured with reference to the leading edge rather than the midchord position, and thus (229) is multiplied by the quantity e−ik. The result 
is slowly varying, as shown in figure 5.34. Physically, this change suggests 
that the foil responds to the gust most significantly when the gust is at the 
leading edge. For this reason the leading edges of propeller blades are often 
raked, so that the phase of the unsteady load along the blade will be distrib­
uted more uniformly as the blade enters a nonuniform region.
Figure 5.34
The Sears function for a sinusoidal gust, corresponding to the factor in brackets in 
(229). The phase of the gust is measured relative to mid chord or leading edge in the 
respective cases shown. Figures marked on the curves are the values of the reduced 
frequency k.

Lifting Surfaces 

5.18  Transient Problems
As noted in section 5.15, the general case of arbitrary time-dependence can 
be treated directly by Laplace transform techniques. Equivalently, the fre­
quency ω in the oscillatory time-dependent results of section 5.16 can be 
made imaginary, and the superposition of these solutions used to generate 
an arbitrary transient disturbance. We shall avoid performing this analysis 
here, but two simple results will be noted—where the vertical velocity of 
the foil is changed suddenly in a step-function manner, and where the foil 
moves into a similar gust.
Since any constant angle of attack may be added without affecting the 
unsteady problem, we assume that initially the foil moves with zero angle 
of attack, and at time t = 0 this is changed by imposing a small vertical 
velocity component. The resulting lift is given proportional to Wagner func­
tion shown in figure 5.35. This lift force immediately achieves a nonzero 
value precisely half of the steady-state value and subsequently increases 
monotonically to that limit. To develop 90 percent of the steady lift, the foil 
must travel about six chord lengths.
This problem is identical to that of a foil accelerating instantaneously 
from rest at t = 0 to a constant velocity U, with a constant angle of attack, 
since in both cases the perturbation vanishes for t < 0. Thus the Wagner 
function in figure 5.35 predicts the initial development of lift during the 
rapid acceleration of a foil with constant α.
An inverse situation will develop if the foil stops suddenly. This case can 
be related to the Wagner function by subtracting a constant angle of attack 
equal to the value before stopping. On this basis it follows that the lift 
force upon stopping is reduced immediately to half of its steady value, and 
subsequently a more gradual attenuation to zero persists over a relatively 
long period.
The corresponding gust problem is that of a sharp-edged gust. The result­
ing lift force, known as the Kussner function, is shown in figure 5.35. In this 
case the lift force rises from an initial value of zero. Half of the ultimate 
steady-state lift develops before the gust passes the trailing edge, and 90 
percent is developed when the foil moves a distance of about eight chord 
lengths beyond the gust. The details of this and other transient motions are 
given by Woods (1961).