used to analyze semisub­ mersible platforms supported by horizontal buoyancy hulls, as well as the wave forces on slender vertical structures. In a very simple form, slenderbody theory has been applied successfully to spar buoys. We shall begin our development of slender-body theory by discussing two relatively simple problems—the longitudinal and lateral motion of a slender body in an unbounded ideal fluid. These are problems that were first treated in aerodynamics, and our study of the lateral motion will lead

Chapter 7
to a derivation of the low-aspect-ratio theory for planar lifting surfaces. The 
results will be applied to the problem of ship maneuvering in the horizon­
tal plane, where free-surface effects are generally small and the double-body 
approximation can be used to avoid the complications of waves. Subse­
quently, wave effects on the free surface will be considered, first for a slen­
der body with no forward velocity and then for a moving ship.
Slender-body approximations can be applied to analyze the effects of 
shallow or restricted water on ships, as will be discussed in section 8, and 
to predict the interactions between adjacent ships. The latter problem is 
treated by Tuck and Newman (1974) and Yeung (1978). The applications 
of slender-body theory to ship hydrodynamics are reviewed by New­
man (1970) and Ogilvie (1974, 1977). A survey of ship hydrodynamics in 
restricted waters is given by Tuck (1978).
7.1  Slender Body in an Unbounded Fluid
Let us consider the problem of a slender body, moving in an unbounded 
ideal fluid, with the fundamental assumption that the transverse dimen­
sions of the body are small compared to its length. To formalize this 
assumption, we define the slenderness parameter
d l
/
,
= ε 	
(1)
where d is the maximum lateral dimension of the body, and l is its length. 
The nondimensional parameter ε is assumed small, and on this basis an 
approximate solution is sought for the hydrodynamic quantities of interest.
The body motions are assumed to consist of a constant forward velocity 
U, parallel to the x0-axis of a space-fixed coordinate system (x0, y0, z0), and a 
small lateral motion in the z0-direction. (Vertical motions in the y0-direction 
can be treated in an identical manner.) A moving coordinate system (x, y, z) 
is defined by the transformations
x
x
Ut
=
−

, 	
(2)
y
y
=
0, 	
(3)
z
z
=
0. 	
(4)
The lateral motion of the body is described by its displacement ζ(x, t) 
from the x0-axis, as shown in figure 7.1. For rigid-body motions ζ will be a