based on rational mechanics. Ultimately, therefore, we must expect both experi­ ments and theory to be used and to be supplemented by full-scale observa­ tions to verify the original predictions. In the theoretical approach the motion of the fluid is defined at each point in time and space by a kinematic description, usually of the vectorial velocity of the fluid particles or alternatively of the three scalar compo­ nents of the velocity. This unknown velocity function is related by means

Chapter 1
of Newton’s equations to the forces that act upon the fluid; this yields a 
system of partial differential equations. For a fluid with conventional stress 
relations, the resulting system of governing equations is the Navier-Stokes 
equations, supplemented by the continuity equation expressing conserva­
tion of fluid mass. In principle, one can solve these equations, subject to 
boundary conditions on the boundary surfaces of the fluid. If this proce­
dure could actually be carried out, it would be possible to calculate desired 
answers for arbitrary values of the Reynolds number and Froude number, 
and the scaling dilemma of model testing would be circumvented. In prac­
tice, however, it has not been possible to solve the Navier-Stokes equations 
exactly, except for a few cases involving very simple geometries that at first 
glance have no relation to the shape of marine vessels.
Considerably more analytical progress can be made if the viscous forces 
are ignored in the Navier-Stokes equations and the fluid is assumed to be 
inviscid or ideal. It is then feasible to construct mathematical solutions for 
the flow past bodies of realistic form and even to include the effects of wave 
motions on the free surface, albeit only after further idealizations. Clearly, 
however, neglecting viscosity will lead to results of only academic interest, 
unless the justification is more relevant than the mathematical desire to 
simplify a system of partial differential equations. For predictions of ship 
resistance, this justification was initially provided by Froude’s hypothesis 
that the resistance could be composed of two separate components, fric­
tional and residual. The frictional component is related to a much sim­
pler geometry, a deeply submerged flat plate, and thus depends only on 
the Reynolds number. The residual component is assumed to depend only 
on the Froude number. This hypothesis was essentially an empirical one; 
its principal justification was that it led to a workable procedure for mak­
ing model tests and obtaining full-scale predictions not totally at variance 
with the actual full-scale results. The neglect of viscosity in treating certain 
aspects of the flow, and Froude’s assumption that the frictional resistance 
of a ship hull could be related to that of a flat plate of the same length 
and area, found a more rational justification after Prandtl developed the 
boundary-layer theory. Thus it became evident that at the relatively large 
Reynolds numbers of interest to naval architects and aerodynamicists, vis­
cous stresses are significant only within the very thin layer of the fluid 
adjoining the rigid surfaces such as the ship’s hull or the airplane. Out­
side this layer the fluid is essentially inviscid, not because its viscosity has