C R m U U Ul F F D ( , ) ( , / ) ( ) / . ∞ ∞ = ∝ 2 2 ρ (37) For impulsive acceleration from a state of rest to a constant velocity U, the parameter U Ul 2 / is small during the period of acceleration and large subse­ quently. Thus added-mass forces will dominate initially, and viscous forces subsequently, with a gradual transition between these regimes as shown in figure 2.15.

Chapter 2
The results in figure 2.15 are for a circular cylinder, synthesized from 
experiments of Sarpkaya (1966) in which the acceleration is practically con­
stant for a short period of time and the velocity is constant thereafter. The 
Reynolds numbers for this experiment are R ≃ 105. The details of the initial 
force peak depend on the magnitude and duration of the acceleration.
2.12  Vortex Shedding
When a bluff cylindrical body such as a circular cylinder is moved with 
constant velocity normal to its axis, one might expect the resulting flow to 
be steady and laterally symmetrical. In fact, neither of these assumptions is 
correct, because of the oscillatory shedding of vortices into the wake shown 
in the last photograph of figure 2.14.
The ultimate configuration of vortices downstream in the wake is anti­
symmetrical as predicted from a stability analysis by von Kármán, and the 
staggered array of shed vortices is known as a Kármán street. The vortices 
are shed into the wake at a frequency f = ω/2π, and as a result of their anti­
symmetrical arrangement a lateral lift force will act on the body with the 
same frequency. The magnitude of the lift force and the frequency can be 
nondimensionalized in the forms
L
U l
C
R
L
max /
( ),



ρ
=
	
(38)
fl U
S R
/
( ),
=
	
(39)
Figure 2.15
Force coefficient for a circular cylinder accelerated from an initial state of rest to a 
constant velocity U, based on experiments of Sarpkaya (1966).

Model Testing 

where Lmax denotes the maximum value of the lift force, per unit length 
along the cylinder, and S is the Strouhal number. These parameters have 
been measured experimentally, especially for circular cylinders where CL 
is typically equal to 0.5 and the Strouhal number is about 0.22 for Reyn­
olds numbers in the laminar regime. As noted by Roshko (1961), the Strou­
hal number for circular cylinders appears to be proportional to the inverse 
of the drag coefficient. For Reynolds numbers between 102 and 107, but 
excluding the transitional regime R ≃ 106, the Strouhal number is approxi­
mated closely by S = 0.23/CD.
From an engineering standpoint, the oscillatory lift force may be of more 
practical importance than the drag, especially if a hydroelastic resonance 
occurs between the Strouhal frequency and a structural mode of vibration 
of the body. Strumming oscillations of cables are a consequence of this 
phenomena, as well as lateral vibrations induced upon pilings and other 
fixed structures in a current. The magnitude of the oscillatory lift force can 
be reduced by cable fairing or simply by installing a small splitter plate on 
the after-side of the cylinder. For long slender cylinders with axis normal to 
the flow direction, the correlation of the vortices along the cylinder axis is 
particularly important, and small devices that destroy this correlation are 
effective in reducing the total lift force. On the other hand, lateral vibra­
tions of the body in response to the lift force will serve to correlate the 
phase of the vortex shedding, thereby increasing the magnitude of the lift. 
Extensive bibliographies of this subject are given by Mair and Maull (1971) 
and Berger and Wille (1972). More recent work is described by Griffin and 
Ramberg (1976).
2.13  Wave Force on a Stationary Body
Ocean waves are of particular interest to ocean engineers and naval archi­
tects because of the interactions between these waves and structures on 
or beneath the free surface. Our first example of such a problem is the 
unsteady force acting upon a fixed structure in the presence of waves. For 
simplicity, we treat only the x-component of this force, but a similar analy­
sis applies for the total force vector.
Assuming geometrical similarity, we can describe the structure by a 
length scale l, which may be the length or the diameter of the body. If we 
neglect surface tension effects and assume a plane progressive wave system