extensions of these relations are given by Wehausen (1971) and New­ man (1976). Vugts (1968) has confirmed (174) from experimental measure­ ments of the damping coefficients and exciting forces. The character of the exciting force and moment as ω → ∞ or λ → 0 can be inferred from a physical argument and confirmed from the Haskind rela­ tions. Physically, if the wavelength is short compared to the body length, several waves will exist simultaneously along the body and cancellation

Waves and Wave Effects 

will occur. Moreover, the exponential decay of (16) with depth will result 
in a significant effect of the incident waves only in a thin “boundary-layer” 
region near the free surface. Alternatively, since the damping coefficients 
vanish in the high-frequency limit, it follows from (173) that the threedimensional exciting force must tend to zero faster than (Vg/k)1/2, or using 
(17) and (77),6 gives
X
o
i( )
(
),
/
θ
ω
=
−3 2
	
(175)
as ω → ∞. In two dimensions, it follows from (174) that
X
o
i =
−
(
),
/
ω 1 2
	
(176)
as ω → ∞. These estimates are conservative, and more precise high-frequency 
limits for heave are given in the paper by Davis (1976), and references cited 
therein. For sway, see problem 15.
The simplest representation for the exciting force and moment is based 
on the assumption that the pressure field is not affected by the presence of 
the body and can be determined from the incident wave potential by itself. 
In other words, the diffraction potential ϕ7 is neglected completely in the 
integrals (160–162). This approach was utilized in the earliest theories for 
ship motions in waves; it is known as the Froude-Krylov hypothesis in honor 
of the authors of those theories.
Historically, the Froude-Krylov approach was expedient, but in certain 
cases it can be justified. For a thin ship, with centerplane z = 0, Peters 
and Stoker (1957) have shown that the Froude-Krylov exciting force and 
moment are the leading-order contributions in the vertical plane, i.e., for 
surge, heave, and pitch (j = 1, 2, 6). A similar result is established for slender 
bodies in chapter 7. Both proofs are valid only if the wavelength is large 
compared to the beam.
To illustrate the Froude-Krylov approach for a thin ship, we start with 
(162) and restrict our attention to motions in the vertical plane (i = 1, 2, 6). 
The normal components nx, and ny can be approximated by the slopes 
∂ζ/∂x and ∂ζ/∂y, respectively, where ζ(x, y) is the local half-beam which is 
assumed small. From the boundary conditions (120–121), the normal deriv­
atives ∂ϕi/∂n will be first-order quantities, proportional to the beam. For fol­
lowing or head waves (θ = 0 or 180°), it follows from the boundary condition 
(124) that the diffraction potential ϕ7 also will be a small first-order quantity 
proportional to nx and ny.