= 0. Here d is the distance from the body axis to the wall. Derive from this equation and (133) the special case F U R d = 3 π ρ / for a sphere of radius R, and F U d = ∀ π ρ / for a slender prolate spheroid moving in the longitudinal direction. References Cummins, W. E. 1957. The force and moment on a body in a time-varying potential flow. J. Ship Res. 1 (1): 7–18.

The Motion of an Ideal Fluid 

Flagg, C., and J. N. Newman. 1971. Sway added-mass coefficients for rectangular 
profiles in shallow water. J. Ship Res. 15:257–265.
Havelock, T. H. 1963. Collected papers. ONR/ACR-103. Washington: U. S. Govern­
ment Printing Office.
Hildebrand, F. B. 1976. Advanced calculus for applications. 2nd ed. Englewood Cliffs, 
N.J.: Prentice-Hall.
Kennard, E. H. 1967. Irrotational flow of frictionless fluids, mostly of invariable density. 
David Taylor Model Basin Report 2229.
Kochin, N. E., I. A. Kibel, and N. V. Roze. 1964. Theoretical Hydromechanics. English 
translation of. 5th Russian ed. New York: Wiley.
Lamb, H. 1932. Hydrodynamics. 6th ed. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Reprinted 1945, New York: Dover.
Landweber, L., and C. S. Yih. 1956. Forces, moments, and added masses for Rankine 
bodies. Journal of Fluid Mechanics 1:319–336.
Milne-Thomson, L. M. 1968. Theoretical hydrodynamics. 5th ed. New York: 
Macmillan.
Morse, P. M., and H. Feshbach. 1953. Methods of theoretical physics, 2 vols. New York: 
McGraw-Hill.
Newman, J. N. 1978. The added moment of inertia of two-dimensional cylinders. J. 
Ship Res. 23:1–8.
Sedov, L. I. 1965. Two dimensional problems in hydrodynamics and aerodynamics. 
English translation. New York: Interscience.

5  Lifting Surfaces
Chapter 

Lifting 
Surfaces
© Massachusetts Institute of TechnologyAll Rights Reserved
One of the most striking applications of fluid mechanics is the lifting sur­
face that supports the flight of birds, airplanes, and hydrofoil boats. Similar 
effects are involved in the actions of control surfaces such as rudders, yacht 
sails and keels, and screw propellers. Thus, there are many applications of 
lifting surfaces in marine hydrodynamics; a proper understanding of their 
actions must preface an intelligent approach to their design and use.
Typically, a lifting surface is a thin streamlined body that moves through 
the surrounding fluid at a small angle of attack, with a resultant hydrody­
namic lift force generated in the direction normal to the forward move­
ment. We shall suppose that the lifting surface is primarily oriented in the 
x-z plane and moving with constant velocity U in the positive x-direction, 
as shown in figure 5.1. The lift force L is the component of the hydro­
dynamic force parallel to the y-axis; the drag force D acts in the negative 
x-direction.
The principal geometric dimensions of the lifting surface are its chord 
length l and span s, measured parallel to the x- and z-axes respectively. For 
a rectangular planform, l is a constant, but in general the chord l(z) will 
depend on the transverse coordinate. The ratio of the span to the mean 
chord is the aspect ratio A, given by
A
s
S
=
2 / , 	
(1)
where S is the projected area of the lifting surface on the plane y = 0.
The aspect ratio is an important measure of the effect of threedimensionality. A large aspect ratio implies that the flow will be nearly inde­
pendent of the transverse coordinate z, and a two-dimensional strip-theory 
approach is valid. This situation is exemplified by older aircraft wings, as 
well as by some hydrofoil configurations and deep narrow centerboards on