as the carrier wave. This type of wave motion is illustrated in figure 6.8, which shows a group of carrier waves enclosed by a slowly-varying envelope. The wavelength and period of the carrier are the usual parameters λ = 2π/k1 and T = 2π/ω1. By analogy, the wavelength of the group is 2π/δk, and its period in time is 2π/δω. Of particular interest is the group velocity Vg, given by the ratio V k g = δω δ . (61)

Waves and Wave Effects 

In the limiting case where δω → 0, δk → 0, (60) will tend to a mono­
chromatic plane wave, but if x and t are large, the amplitude modulation 
in (60) will persist so long as the products xδk and tδω are finite. Under this 
circumstance the group velocity (61) will approach the finite limit
V
d
dk
g =
ω , 	
(62)
in accordance with the classical definition of a derivative. Thus, a group of 
waves of nearly equal frequency and wavenumber will propagate with the 
velocity (62), as opposed to the phase velocity Vp = ω/k of the individual 
wave components in the group.
In general, the phase and group velocities differ, unless ω/k = dω/dk, 
which will occur only if the frequency and wavenumber are directly pro­
portional and the phase velocity is constant. This exception occurs in the 
shallow-water limit kh ≪ 1.
In deep water, the group velocity can be evaluated by solving the disper­
sion relation (17) for ω(k) and substituting this in (62). Thus
V
g
k
k
V
g
p
=
=
=


1 2




(
/ )
/
,
/
ω
	
(63)
and the group velocity is precisely half of the phase velocity. In finite depth, 
the dispersion relation (24) can be combined with (62) to give
V
kh
kh V
g
p
=
+







sinh
. 	
(64)
This expression reduces to (63) if kh is large, whereas in the shallow-water 
limit the factor in parenthesis in (64) reduces to unity. The value of the 
Figure 6.8
Wave group resulting from the superposition of two nearly equal plane waves as in 
(60). The individual waves travel with the phase velocity, while the envelope travels 
with the group velocity (61).

Chapter 6
group velocity is plotted in figure 6.9, as a ratio of the infinite-depth phase 
velocity. This figure shows that the group velocity is less than the phase 
velocity; their ratio decreases from one to one-half as the water depth 
increases. The curve in figure 6.9 also shows that for fixed frequency and 
increasing depth, the group velocity attains a maximum value somewhat 
greater than its infinite-depth limit, at an intermediate depth where h/λ is 
about 0.2.
That individual waves move faster than the group implies that in a 
wave system with a front, propagating into otherwise calm water, the 
individual waves will overtake the front and vanish. This phenomenon 
can be observed in a wave tank by starting the wavemaker from rest at a 
Figure 6.9
Phase velocity and group velocity ratios for a plane progressive wave as a function 
of the depth.