if the slope of the foil is sufficiently small over its entire surface (except at the leading edge!). A linearized problem can be formulated in exactly the same manner as for the two-dimensional case in section 5.2. The thickness problem can be solved again in terms of a suitable source distribution, and the lifting Figure 5.17 Definition sketch for equation (113), showing the position vector R and differential line element dl along a vortex filament situated on the contour C.

Lifting Surfaces 

problem can be reduced to one involving a mean-camber surface of zero 
thickness where there is a specified normal velocity
v x
z
U
x
x z
( , , )
( , ).

= −
∂
∂η
	
(114)
This boundary condition must be supplemented by the Kutta condition 
requiring finite velocity all along the trailing edge.
As in the two-dimensional case, a solution of the boundary condition 
(114) can be constructed by a suitable distribution of vortices in the plane 
y = 0. In general, such a distribution would be comprised of line vortices of 
varying strengths and varying orientation angles. In other words, γ in this 
case is a vector situated in the plane y = 0. This vector can be decomposed 
into a bound component, parallel to the z-axis, and a free component, paral­
lel to the x-axis. Thus it is necessary to consider only these two specific ori­
entations and the induced velocities corresponding to each. In section 5.8 
we showed that the limiting behavior of a line vortex very close to its axis 
is identical to that of a two-dimensional point vortex of the same strength. 
Thus the results derived in section 5.2, for a distribution of two-dimensional 
vortices along the x-axis, will apply locally for the bound vortex distribu­
tion in three dimensions. In particular, a bound vortex distribution of den­
sity γB(x, z) will induce a discontinuity in the chordwise component of the 
fluid velocity, across the plane y = 0, in accordance with the relation
u x
z
x z
B
( ,
, )
( , ).
±
=



∓
γ
	
(115)
Similarly, a free vortex distribution of density γF(x, z) will induce a disconti­
nuity in the spanwise component across y = 0 given by
w x
z
x z
F
( ,
, )
( , ).
±
= ±


2 γ
	
(116)
Note that the right-hand rule applies here; the circulation of the bound 
vortices is defined as positive about the z-axis and that of the free vortices 
positive about the x-axis.
These planar distributions of vortices are known generally as vortex 
sheets, and we may refer separately to the bound vortex sheet and the free 
vortex sheet. These are not independent, however, since the velocity field 
adjacent to the sheets must be irrotational. Using (115) and (116) to com­
pute the y-component of the vorticity adjacent to the foil, we get