y, z) is situated outside S, (71) is valid without modification and the left-hand side of (76) or (77) is replaced by zero. SimiВӯ lar results hold in two dimensions, with the source potential 1/r replaced by log r and with the surface integrals in the above relations replaced by line integrals; in this case the factors 4ПҖ and 2ПҖ are multiplied by вҲ’1/2, corВӯ responding to the difference in the radial flux between the singularities 1/r and log r.

The Motion of an Ideal FluidвҖҒ

Equation (77) is frequently used for constructing the velocity potential 
due to the motion of a ship hull or other moving body. Generally, the norВӯ
mal derivative вҲӮП•/вҲӮn is known on the body, so that (77) is an integral equaВӯ
tion for the determination of the unknown potential; it may be solved by 
approximations or numerical techniques.
For a body moving in an otherwise infinite and unbounded fluid, the 
appropriate closed surface S enclosing the fluid volume must include both 
the body surface SB and an additional control surface SC surrounding the 
body. It then can be argued that SB + SC together form a closed surface surВӯ
rounding the fluid volume пҒ– or, at least, that portion of пҒ– within a finite 
distance of the body. The contribution from SC to the integral in (77) can 
be estimated from the expansion of a general three-dimensional velocВӯ
ity potential in spherical harmonics, (69). For large spherical radius r, the 
potential due to the presence of the body is of order rвҲ’1, and вҲӮП•/вҲӮn of order 
rвҲ’2. Thus the integrand of (77) is of order rвҲ’3, whereas on SC the differential 
area dS will increase in proportion to the square of the distance from the 
origin. It then follows that the contribution to (77) from SC is of order rвҲ’1, 
and vanishes in the limit where this surface is an infinite distance from the 
body. Therefore, for a body moving in an unbounded fluid, the integral in 
(77) can be taken simply over the surface of the body SB.
In many problems, however, the body may move in a fluid bounded by 
other boundaries, such as the free surface, the fluid bottom, or possibly latВӯ
eral boundaries such as canal walls. In each of these cases additional boundВӯ
ary conditions are imposed, and there is often a computational advantage 
in solving (77) if the source potential is modified to satisfy the same boundВӯ
ary conditions as П•. In this context the Green function
G x y z
r
H x y z
( , , ; , , )
/
( , , ; , , ),
Оҫ О· О¶
Оҫ О· О¶
=
+

(78)
where H is any function that satisfies the Laplace equation, can be substiВӯ
tuted for the source potential in (76вҖ“77) since (71) is valid for the contribuВӯ
tion from the regular function H. Thus, with the Green function defined by 
(78), we can state that
ПҶ
ПҶ
ПҖПҶ
ПҖПҶ
вҲӮ
вҲӮ
вҲ’
вҲӮ
вҲӮ
пЈ«
пЈӯ
пЈ¶
пЈё
=
вҲ’
вҲ’
пЈұ
пЈІпЈҙ
пЈіпЈҙ
пЈј
пЈҪпЈҙ
пЈҫпЈҙ
вҲ«вҲ«
G
n
G n dS
x y z
x y z
S



( , , )
( , , )
, 	
(79)