will affect both the lift and drag forces on the foil. To account for these effects appro­ priately for large aspect ratios, Prandtl developed the lifting-line theory. With boundary-layer theory, this must be regarded as an outstanding exam­ ple of the use of asymptotic approximations to simplify a more complicated problem. The lifting-line approach of Prandtl can be regarded as a second approximation, correcting the strip-theory approach, in the same sense that boundary-layer theory corrects the assumption of inviscid flow.

Lifting Surfaces 

If the span of the foil is much larger than the chord length, the flow can 
be described as it would appear to both an observer in the inner region, with 
length scales comparable to the chord, and an observer in the outer region, 
with length scales comparable to the span. The corresponding domains are 
essentially as sketched in figures 5.2 and 5.21, respectively. Thus, the inner 
solution appears to be two dimensional, with an appropriate section geom­
etry for the foil and a corresponding inflow velocity and angle of attack. 
From the standpoint of this inner flow, the three-dimensional effects are 
slowly varying on the scale of the span, and hence locally constant. This 
is not to suggest that three-dimensional effects are negligible in the inner 
region; but being locally constant, these can be allowed for by suitably 
correcting the inflow velocity vector. Thus, a two-dimensional problem is 
anticipated for the inner flow, identical to that treated in sections 5.2 to 5.4, 
but modified in the second approximation by an inflow velocity and direc­
tion unknown in advance. Once these are given, the inner solution can be 
obtained in terms of the two-dimensional foil characteristics, notably the 
total circulation Γ(z) at each section.
Next we consider the corresponding outer solution, as sketched in fig­
ure 5.21. Here one is too far away to be concerned about details of the foil 
geometry, such as its local camber and angle of attack. Instead, the impor­
tant features are the presence of a bound vortex Γ(z) and corresponding 
trailing vortices with density Γ'′(z), which govern the outer flow. The trail­
ing vortex sheet, which is absent from the two-dimensional inner solution, 
induces a significant three-dimensional effect on the inner flow, notably 
the downwash velocity. To account for this effect, we must calculate the 
downwash velocity induced by the trailing vortex sheet.
The problem is simplified considerably by restricting our attention to 
lifting surfaces, as shown in figure 5.21, where there is no sweepback angle. 
In the outer view of this problem, the foil occupies a straight line or a finite 
segment −(
)




s
s
,
 of the z-axis. The trailing vortices are situated in the 
portion of the plane y = 0 downstream of this segment, and each individual 
trailing vortex element coincides with a semi-infinite line −∞ < x < 0, y = 
0, z = ζ. The computation of the induced velocity at points on the z-axis is 
facilitated by noting from symmetry that a semi-infinite vortex filament, 
extending from x = −∞ upstream to the plane x = 0, will induce in this plane 
precisely half of the velocity that would result from an infinite line vortex