the force due to gravity ρg, where g is the gravitational acceleration vector. For all practical purposes g is a constant, acting downward with magnitude 9.8 m/s2 or 32.2 ft/s2. If this is the only body force acting upon the fluid, or more generally if the body force is conservative, it can be represented as the gradient of a scalar function, in the form F x = ∇ ρ Ω( ) where, for gravity, Ω = g∙x. From the Navier-Stokes

The Motion of a Viscous Fluid 

equations (25), this force can be absorbed with the pressure p, by means of 
the substitution p
p
=
−ρΩ. With this modification the Navier-Stokes equa­
tions no longer include the body-force terms explicitly. Hence, as far as 
conservation of momentum is concerned, the only effect of a gravitational 
force or any conservative force field is to change the pressure by an additive 
amount −ρΩ.
Generally we regard p as the total pressure, p − ρΩ as the hydrodynamic 
pressure, and the difference as the hydrostatic pressure. If the fluid is in a 
state of rest, the total and hydrostatic pressures are equal.
In view of this additive decomposition, the body force has no effect on 
the fluid motion, unless it affects the problem via a boundary condition. 
Except for this possibility, the effect of gravity can be ignored through­
out, with the understanding that this gives rise to an additive hydrostatic 
pressure.
Gravity will play an important role when we consider wave motions 
on the free surface. Here the dynamic boundary condition states that the 
total pressure is equal to a specified value, and the hydrostatic component 
must be included. When the boundary conditions are entirely kinematic, 
however, with prescribed values of the normal velocity, there can be no 
interaction between gravitational forces acting on the fluid and the dynam­
ics of the fluid motion. With this justification, we will hereafter ignore body 
forces in general and the gravitational force in particular until chapter 6, 
where we consider the problem of waves on a free surface.
3.10  The Flow between Two Parallel Walls (Plane Couette Flow)
The simplest solutions of the Navier-Stokes equations are those pertaining 
to the steady flow of a viscous fluid between two parallel walls separated by 
a distance h, under the assumption that the horizontal dimensions of the 
walls are very large compared to h. It is reasonable then to assume that the 
flow is independent of the coordinates parallel to the walls and depends 
only on the transverse coordinate. Let us suppose that the two walls occupy 
the planes y = 0 and y = h, and that the motion is in the x-direction, driven 
either by a pressure gradient or by the imposed uniform motion of one wall 
relative to the other or by a combination of these two effects.
Let us suppose that the boundary y = 0 is at rest, while the boundary 
y = h moves in the positive x-direction with velocity U. (Such a situation