the only effect of the velocity fluctuations is to contribute an additional stress system. By comparison with Euler’s equations (18), this Reynolds stress is equal to − ′ ′ ρu u i j. In other words, the total stress tensor can be written in the form τ δ µ ρ ij ij i j j i i j p u x u x u u = − + ∂ ∂ + ∂ ∂    − ′ ′. (91)

The Motion of a Viscous Fluid 

Physically, the Reynolds stress can be identified with the transport of 
momentum associated with the fluctuating components of the velocity. If 
this stress were known, equation (91) could be solved for the mean veloc­
ity ūi in a manner analogous to the solution of the Navier-Stokes equa­
tions for laminar flow. However, there is no rational method of determining 
the Reynolds stress system, for example by imposing additional boundary 
conditions, and so it is necessary to resort to empirical methods based on 
experimental observations.
In general, Reynolds stresses are more important than the ordinary 
viscous stresses. This is apparent from (91) since the Reynolds number is 
inversely proportional to the viscosity coefficient μ. Thus, the Reynolds 
stress system will be dominant at high Reynolds numbers, except in the 
viscous sublayer very close to the boundaries, where the mean velocity gradi­
ent is large and, simultaneously, the fluctuating components are forced to 
vanish by the boundary condition ′ =
ui
0 on the wall.
The increased stress level due to the Reynolds stress suggests that the 
frictional drag on a body will be greater in the turbulent regime than is 
the case for laminar flow, and this is confirmed by experimental data, as 
shown in figure 2.3. An alternative physical explanation is suggested by 
the convection of momentum, represented by the Reynolds stress. Since 
this momentum convection will cause the velocity profile to become more 
uniform, as shown in figure 3.9, it must result ultimately in a larger velocity 
gradient and shear stress on the body surface.
3.18  Turbulent Boundary Layer on a Flat Plate
Now let us consider the characteristics of the mean velocity distribution for 
the flow in a turbulent boundary layer. To keep this very complex problem 
as simple as possible, we shall assume a flat plate with zero pressure gradi­
ent. Also, we shall be concerned only with the mean velocity ū, and the bar 
will be deleted with the understanding that the average value is implied.
The tangential velocity component u is assumed to be of the form
u
f x y
U
=
( , , , ,
),
ρ µ
	
(92)
where x and y are the usual space coordinates with the plate occupying the 
positive x-axis, ρ and μ are the density and viscosity of the fluid, and U is 
the velocity of the free stream outside the boundary layer. The subsequent