) ( ), (47) dy dt Ae kx t O A ky = − + ω ω sin( ) ( ). (48) The second-order vertical motion of a given particle of fluid is strictly periodic, with the velocity given by (48), but the horizontal velocity (47) contains a steady Stokes’ drift. Integrating (47) vertically with respect to all particles of fluid −∞ < y0 < 0 yields the total mean flux Q A kA Vp = = ω . (49)

Waves and Wave Effects 

The same result could be derived directly from a computation of the aver­
age flux across a vertical column of fluid −∞ < y < η (see problem 3).
The presence of a mean drift is obvious from the observation of small 
vessels floating in waves, although here the mean motion of the vessel may 
be affected more by wind forces and other nonlinear effects such as surf­
ing. Mass transport can result in the piling up of water at a beach, with an 
associated increase in the local mean depth. In some cases a long-shore cur­
rent is associated with this phenomenon. This effect is discussed by Wiegel 
(1964). In shallow water, viscous effects significantly modify the mean drift 
flow, in a manner described by Longuet-Higgins (1953) and by Ünlüata and 
Mei (1970).
6.6  Superposition of Plane Waves
The plane progressive wave described in sections 6.2 and 6.3 is a single, 
discrete wave system, with a prescribed monochromatic component of 
frequency ω and wavenumber k, moving in the positive x-direction. This 
wave system can be generalized in several respects. First, the wave profile 
(7) rewritten in the form
η
ω
=
+
A
kx
t
cos(
), 	
(50)
corresponds to a plane progressive wave moving in the negative x-direction. 
The subsequent relations derived in sections 6.2 and 6.3 are unchanged, 
except that the phase function (kx − ωt) is replaced by (kx + ωt) throughout, 
and the signs of some expressions must be reversed.
More generally, in three dimensions, a plane wave moving in an arbi­
trary direction, at a polar angle θ in the horizontal x-z plane, can be ana­
lyzed by rotating the coordinate system appropriately. As shown in figure 
6.6, the coordinate x′ may be defined to coincide with the direction of wave 
propagation. Since x′ = x cosθ + z sinθ, the appropriate generalization of (7) 
is given by
η
θ
θ
ω
=
+
−
A
kx
kz
t
cos(
cos
sin
), 	
(51)
with similar expressions for the velocity potentials (16) and (23). Note that 
for θ = π, (51) reduces to (50).
In the linearized theory, solutions may be superposed without violating 
the boundary conditions or Laplace’s equation. Thus considerable scope