partial differential equations, together with the con­ tinuity equation (15), governs the motion of a viscous fluid subject only to the assumptions of constant density and a Newtonian stress-strain rela­ tionship. The latter is justified for all practical purposes in the case of most fluids, including water and air. The difficulty comes in attempting to solve the Navier-Stokes equations; they form a coupled system of nonlinear partial differential equations and have been solved analytically only for some very simple geometrical

Chapter 3
configurations, principally those in which the nonlinear convective accel­
eration terms (V ⋅∇) V can be assumed to vanish. We shall examine some 
examples of such flows subsequently.
3.8  Boundary Conditions
Before attempting to solve the Navier-Stokes equations, it is necessary to 
impose appropriate physical conditions on the boundaries of the fluid 
domain. In fact, it is precisely these conditions that distinguish different 
flow problems.
The simplest boundary condition is that which must be imposed on a 
solid boundary, such as the boundary between the fluid and a rigid body. 
In this case, the fluid velocity equals the velocity of the body, since in a 
viscous fluid the existence of a shear stress requires both the normal and 
tangential velocity components of the fluid and the boundary to be equal.
An alternative physical boundary is a free surface, such as will exist 
between the surface of the ocean and the atmosphere or between the 
fluid and vapor domains of a cavitating flow. In these instances the fluid 
density is so large, by comparison with the neighboring gas, that tangential 
stresses are negligible; the only stress at such a surface is the normal pres­
sure, which is generally known and specified (atmospheric pressure or vapor 
pressure for the two cases cited). This is the dynamic boundary condition 
at a free surface. In addition, it is necessary to impose the kinematic bound­
ary condition that the normal velocity of the fluid and of the free surface 
are equal.
3.9  Body Forces and Gravity
In our derivation of the Euler and Navier-Stokes equations, an external 
body force per unit volume, F, has been included without specification or 
restriction. The most common and important body force in the context 
of marine hydrodynamics is the force due to gravity ρg, where g is the 
gravitational acceleration vector. For all practical purposes g is a constant, 
acting downward with magnitude 9.8 m/s2 or 32.2 ft/s2. If this is the only 
body force acting upon the fluid, or more generally if the body force is 
conservative, it can be represented as the gradient of a scalar function, in 
the form F
x
=
∇
ρ Ω( ) where, for gravity, Ω = g∙x. From the Navier-Stokes