of viscosity for many problems of engineering interest is confined to a thin layer adjacent to boundary surfaces. Furthermore, if the radii of curvature of these surfaces are large compared to the boundary-layer thickness, the flow will appear locally plane in the boundary layer. There are exceptions to this convenient state of affairs; for example, in low-Reynolds-number flows, the role of viscosity is not confined to a thin boundary layer. This situation would hold for bodies of microscopic size, as

Chapter 3
in fluid suspensions or the swimming of microorganisms, but these are out­
side the usual scope of ocean engineering and naval architecture. A more 
significant exception here is separation, for flows past bodies not suitably 
streamlined. Separated flows are practically impossible to analyze. When 
these exist, the boundary-layer theory is useful only for predicting the flow 
upstream of the separation point and ultimately for predicting the occur­
rence of separation.
3.1  Description of the Flow
Adopting the Eulerian approach, we define a velocity vector V(x, y, z, t) to 
be equal to the velocity of the fluid particle at the point x = (x, y, z) in a Car­
tesian, rectangular coordinate system at time t. In this coordinate system 
the three components of V will be denoted by u, v, and w. Other physical 
parameters that will be required are the fluid density ρ, which ultimately 
will be assumed constant; the external force field F acting on the fluid par­
ticles, notably the gravitational force ρg; and the surface stresses, or forces 
per unit area, which act upon adjacent surfaces of the fluid.
Each component of the surface stress must be defined not only by the 
direction in which it acts but also by the orientation of the surface upon 
which it is acting; hence, a total of 3 × 3 = 9 stress components must be 
defined on a cubical surface aligned with the coordinate system, as shown 
in figure 3.1. Thus, for example, the stress τyx acts in the y-direction upon a 
surface of constant x.
This characterization of the stress components is actually too restrictive, 
since it does not account for the more general situation where the orienta­
tion of the surface differs from one of the three principal planes of a Car­
tesian coordinate system. By a familiar argument that plays a similar role 
in structural mechanics, however, the cube in figure 3.1 can be replaced by 
an infinitesimal tetrahedron, with three orthogonal faces normal to the 
Cartesian coordinates and one oblique face of arbitrary orientation. The 
tetrahedron is assumed to be sufficiently small that the stresses are effec­
tively constant along each face, and since the volume will be negligible 
compared with the surface area, the surface forces will dominate the body 
forces. Thus, the forces exerted on the four faces of the tetrahedron by the 
surface stress components must balance. If n = (nx, ny, nz) denotes the unit 
normal vector on the oblique face, each of its three components equals the