as slender pilings, ship hulls, and mooring cables, the three-dimensional added-mass coefficients can be approximated by a strip theory synthesis, in which the flow at each section is assumed to be locally two dimensional. Thus, the simpler two-dimensional added-mass coefficients are of practi­ cal importance. The case of a circular cylinder is given by (132), and the corresponding results for an elliptical cylinder can be derived in a similar manner, taking advantage of the conformal transformation (51) to map the

Chapter 4
ellipse onto a circle. The added-mass coefficients of an ellipse are closely 
related to those of a circle, as shown in table 4.3. For acceleration parallel 
to either of the principal axes of the ellipse, the added mass is equal to that 
of a circle having the same radius as the semiaxis normal to the motion. 
The same results hold for a flat plate, or an ellipse of vanishing minor axis, 
where the added mass for motion normal to the plate is equal to the dis­
placed mass of the circumscribed circle.
The last result can be confirmed from the complex potential (57), either 
by direct integration over the plate using (114) or by computing the effec­
tive dipole moment and using (130). For acceleration in the plane of the 
plate there is no added-mass force, in the absence of viscous effects. Simi­
larly, the added moment of inertia of the circle is zero, but nonzero for all 
other cases.
Table 4.3
Added-Mass Coefficients for Various Two-Dimensional Bodies.
m11:
πρa

πρb


m22:
πρa

πρa

πρa

m66:




2 2
πρ(
)
a
b
−



πρa
m11:
πρ[a
2 + (b
2 − a
2)
2/b
2]
πρa

4.754 ρa

m22:
πρa

πρa

4.754 ρa

m66:
*


π ρa
0.725 ρa

*For the finned circle the added moment of inertia is given by the formula 
m
a












=
−
+
−
−
ρ
π
α
α
α
α
α
π
(
csc
[
sin
sin
]
)
/
, where sin α = 2ab/(a
2 + b
2) and 
π/2 < α < π. The derivations of this result, and of m66 for the crossed fin and square, 
are given by Newman (1978). Derivations of the remaining coefficients in this table 
are given or cited by Kennard (1967).

The Motion of an Ideal Fluid 

Table 4.3 lists the added-mass coefficients for several two-dimensional 
bodies including the circle, ellipse, flat plate, finned circle, crossed flat 
plates, and square. The symmetry of these bodies is such that the remain­
ing added-mass coefficients are zero. Thus in these cases there is no coupling 
between the three principal modes of motion of the body. The results shown 
in table 4.3 can be derived by appropriate conformal mappings, some of 
which are illustrated in the problems listed at the end of this chapter.
In three dimensions, ellipsoids are the most general bodies where com­
parable analytical results are available. Since there are three planes of sym­
metry, the only nonzero added-mass coefficients are the six values of mij 
where i = j. These will depend on the two nondimensional ratios defining 
the shape of the ellipsoid; appropriate graphs may be found in Kochin, 
Kibel, and Roze (1964).
A simpler three-dimensional body is the spheroid, or ellipsoid of revolu­
tion. If the coordinate x1 is chosen to coincide with the axis of revolution, 
with a the semilength of this axis, and b the radius at the equatorial plane 
x1 = 0, three nonzero coefficients must be considered, including the longi­
tudinal added mass m11, the lateral added mass m22 = m33, and the rotational 
added mass m55 = m66. These will depend on the ratio b/a or the beamlength ratio of the body.
Graphs of the three added-mass coefficients for a spheroid are shown in 
figure 4.8. The upper half of this figure shows the coefficients nondimen­
sionalized in terms of the mass and moment of inertia of the displaced vol­
ume of fluid. In the limiting case where b/a → 0, or a slender spheroid, the 
longitudinal added-mass coefficient tends to zero in a manner analogous to 
the flat plate moving in its own plane. On the other hand, the correspond­
ing limits for the lateral added-mass coefficient and added moment of iner­
tia are both equal to 1.0, as one would predict using the strip theory and 
the added mass of a circular cylinder. For increasing values of b/a, the lon­
gitudinal added mass becomes significant, whereas the lateral added-mass 
coefficient decreases because of the three-dimensional effects. The case b/a 
= 1 coincides with the sphere, where the translational added-mass equals 
one half of the displaced mass, and the rotational coefficients vanish. For 
b/a > 1, the spheroid is flattened, or oblate. For b/a → ∞, corresponding to 
a circular disc, the coefficients based on displaced mass and mass-moment 
are degenerate; to avoid this difficulty the coefficients are renormalized in 
the lower half of figure 4.8.