introduction of the concept of added mass and the coefficient-based force formulation included in Mori­ son’s equation. Problem 14 illustrates how the contributions from the inertia term and the drag term depend on the cylinder diameter. Froude’s hypothesis for the drag on a ship hull is one of my favorites; I frequently use the ITTC-line in figure 2.12 to estimate the frictional resistance on ships. I used this curve as well as equation (23) of chapter 2 when advising the

xvi 
Foreword
kayaker Eirik Verås Larsen as he prepared for the 2012 London Olympics. 
His question was how to reduce frictional and wave resistance. I suggested 
that the only variable to play with was the wet area of the kayak—the por­
tion touching the water, which should be minimal. Larsen and his team 
eventually discovered that he could reduce his weight—which he eventu­
ally reduced by 10 percent—and won the gold medal on the K1 1000m 
event.
John Grue
University of Oslo
March 16, 2017

Preface to the 40th Anniversary Edition
Preface 
to 
the 
40th 
Anniversary 
Edition
Preface 
to 
the 
40th 
Anniversary 
Edition
© Massachusetts Institute of TechnologyAll Rights Reserved
The field of marine hydrodynamics has broadened greatly over the past 
40 years, with applications to a wide variety of vessels and structures. 
These include systems for converting energy from the wind, waves, and 
currents; yachts, high-speed vessels, aquaculture facilities, and various 
types of submerged vessels; and traditional applications to ships and off­
shore platforms. The support for education and research has grown accord­
ingly; it is gratifying that the term “marine hydrodynamics” has become 
ubiquitous for university departments, research laboratories, conferences, 
and publications.
The basic topics of the field are unchanged, corresponding broadly to 
the chapters of this text. Numerical methods that extend the applications 
of the theory have been developed. Practicing engineers and naval archi­
tects are now making routine use of well-established programs to optimize 
their designs and predict performance. These programs include Navier–
Stokes solvers, which analyze viscous effects including turbulence, and 
“panel” programs based on boundary-integral equations to solve potentialflow problems including lifting and wave effects. This evolution has been 
accelerated by the universal access to computers of increasing capacity 
and convenience. Nevertheless, it is essential to understand the underlying 
principles covered in this text, and to compare the results of computations 
with simpler approximations to be confident of their validity.
I am grateful to the MIT Press for suggesting this special edition and 
for making it available economically, both as a paperback and as an open 
access e-book. I am especially grateful to Professor John Grue for the fore­
word, which reflects his long experience using this text.