these imply an interaction between adjacent sections of the ship hull, depending on the rate of change in the longitudinal direc­ tion of the inner solution. The only role of the x-coordinate on Φ2 is the parametric dependence on the hull profile ∑B(x). Thus Φ2 will be purely two dimensional in those cases where ∑B is locally independent of x, as along the parallel middle body of a ship hull. In this particular case the speed-dependent terms in (97) vanish,

Chapter 7
and the force coefficients a22 and b22 in (104) are identical to the added-mass 
and damping coefficients for the two-dimensional cylinder, with profile ∑B. 
For this particular case results such as those illustrated in figure 6.23 can be 
substituted for the complex force coefficient Z and used to compute the dif­
ferential force (105), as well as the total force and moment (106–107). Thus, 
for vertical heaving motions of a cylindrical body with constant profile, 
the differential force (105) is independent of the forward speed U. This is 
confirmed physically since a long cylindrical body can be translated in the 
axial direction, in an inviscid fluid, without affecting the surrounding flow 
except near the ends.
In the general case of a ship hull with varying profile ∑B, the difficul­
ties associated with the speed-dependent terms in (97) can be avoided by 
noting that U/ω = O(ε1/2). Thus, to leading order, (97) can be replaced by 
the linearized free-surface condition (6.126) for sinusoidal motion with­
out forward speed. Once again, the zero-speed two-dimensional results can 
be used for the added-mass and damping coefficients in (104). Salvesen, 
Tuck, and Faltinsen (1970) proceed in this manner, using expressions 
equivalent to (106–107). Experimental confirmation is provided by Vugts 
(1970), for both the total force and moment (106–107) and the local force 
distribution (105).
The approach outlined is deficient from the theoretical standpoint, since 
some higher-order terms proportional to U/ω = O(ε1/2) have been retained, 
while others have been neglected. Indeed, one term retained in (107) is 
U2/ω2 = O(ε). In a consistent leading-order theory these terms should be 
discarded. Alternatively, a consistent higher-order theory should be devel­
oped, where all terms of the same order are retained in the free-surface 
condition (97) and in the integral over ∑F in (102).
Ogilvie and Tuck (1969) have performed a consistent analysis, to order 
ε1/2, including the two additional effects and a nonlinear contribution 
to the free-surface boundary condition. These complicated higher-order 
effects largely cancel each other, and to order εl/2 the total force due to 
heave and the moment due to pitch are correctly given by (106) and (107) 
respectively.
The analysis of Ogilvie and Tuck (1969) does reveal additional contribu­
tions to the cross-coupling coefficients, for the heave force due to pitch 
and the pitch moment due to heave, involving integrals of (Φ2)2 over the 
free surface. These are re-derived from an energy analysis by Wang (1976).