engineering and naval architecture, our interest is to describe the response of vessels and structures with dimensions comparable to a few hundred meters, at the most, and with characteristic response times on the order of a few seconds or, in extreme cases, minutes. For this purpose, it should suffice to describe the wave environment over a small portion of the oceans, say on the order of tens or hundreds of kilometers squared. We have no interest in predicting simultaneously the

Waves and Wave Effects 

environment throughout the world, or even throughout the North Atlan­
tic Ocean. The complexity of developing such an extensive description, 
assuming it to be possible, would outweigh completely the advantages of 
making the classical Fourier theory valid!
By the same argument, we are interested in typical wave environments 
that might exist in conjunction with storms of varying severity, but not 
with the transient development of these waves with time. Therefore it 
should suffice to describe the wave environment over a period of a few 
hours, and to assume that the wave motion is stationary during this interval 
of time. It corresponds to this assumption that the waves are homogeneous 
in space over the area in question. These statements have meaning only in 
the statistical sense, since for a random wave system it would be ridiculous 
to suggest that the precise wave motion is the same at different points in 
space or time.
Another consideration from the practical standpoint, which avoids the 
need or desire for a deterministic solution, is that our interest in the wave 
environment is confined not to any one instant of time, but to a typical 
situation that might be expected over a representative period on the order 
of several hundred wave encounters. For this reason, the precise phase of 
any one wave is of no interest, and it is reasonable to assume that the phase 
of each component is distributed randomly with equal probability between 
0 and 2π.
This last assumption overcomes the problem of square-integrability in 
the Fourier integral theory, but strictly it is necessary to replace the distribu­
tion (59) by a Fourier-Stieltjes representation of the form
η
ω θ
θ
θ
ω
( , , )
Re
( , )exp[
( cos
sin )
].
x z t
dA
ik x
z
i t
=
−
+
+
∫∫
	
(196)
Here the wavenumber k is defined in terms of the frequency ω by the disper­
sion relation (17) or (24). The differential wave amplitude dA is a complex 
quantity of random phase, with a magnitude proportional to the square 
root of the total energy in a differential element of the frequency-waveangle space bounded by (ω, ω + dω) and (θ, θ + dθ). This type of representa­
tion, described by Yaglom (1962), can be circumvented by using infinite 
series of discrete waves in place of the continuous distribution (196).
The average energy density can be computed by squaring (196) and tak­
ing its average value; it then takes the form