2.7 shows the drag coefficient. For small positive or negative angles of attack where the lift force is small, the drag coefficient is insensi­ tive to the Reynolds number and takes a value comparable to the flat plate frictional drag coefficient. As stall is approached, the drag goes up apprecia­ bly and in a manner sensitive to the Reynolds number. Since the magnitude of the drag coefficient is small by comparison to the lift, these effects are of less importance.

Model Testing 

2.8  Screw Propeller
A screw propeller consists of several hydrofoil-type lifting surfaces, arranged 
in a helicoidal fashion to produce lift and thrust when rotated about the 
axis. The dimensional analysis of propellers is similar to that of the simpler 
hydrofoil, except for a change in the conventional set of physical parame­
ters. We now consider the required shaft torque Q and resulting axial thrust 
force T associated with a propeller of diameter d, which rotates with con­
stant angular velocity n while simultaneously moving in the forward (axial) 
direction with velocity U, as shown in figure 2.8. Note that n is the number 
of shaft revolutions per unit time; thus, the peripheral velocity of the blade 
at a radius r is 2πnr. A velocity diagram of the blade element at r is as shown 
Figure 2.6
Lift coefficient (16) for a two-dimensional hydrofoil. The results here are for the 
NACA 63–412 section which is shown in figure 2.5. The dashed curve (— — —) 
shows the behavior at stall for a foil with artificial roughness near the leading edge, 
for R = 6 × 10
6. (Adapted from Abbott and von Doenhoff 1959)

Chapter 2
in figure 2.9, which may be compared with figure 2.5. The angle of attack is 
measured now by the nondimensional advance ratio J = U/nd.
The results of section 2.7 suggest that Reynolds-number effects will be 
negligible, provided the propeller is not operated in a regime of exces­
sive angle of attack. Similarly, we assume no cavitation. It follows that the 
thrust and torque can be nondimensionalized so as to depend only on the 
advance ratio, in the form
T
n d
K
J
T
ρ

4 =
( ), 	
(20)
Q
n d
K
J
Q
ρ

5 =
( ). 	
(21)
The propeller efficiency ηp is the ratio of the work done by the propeller in 
developing a thrust force UT, divided by the work required to overcome the 
shaft torque 2πnQ. Thus, it follows that
Figure 2.7
Drag coefficient (17) for the NACA 63–412 section as described in figure 2.6. (Adapt­
ed from Abbott and von Doenhoff 1959)