transferred between adjacent groups, then the energy must travel with the velocity of the group. A similar argument holds for the propagation of the front in fig­ ure 6.10, between a region of a calm water and a system of plane waves; in this situation, no wave energy can be transferred across the front. Since the group velocity is less than the phase velocity, the energy in a plane progressive wave system will be propagated at a slower speed than

Waves and Wave Effects 

the individual wave crests and will be “left behind” in the fluid. This seems 
physically reasonable and explains why ship waves are observed down­
stream of the disturbance that generates them. There are exceptions to this 
situation, however. For very short ripples governed by surface tension, the 
group velocity exceeds the phase velocity and the resulting waves occur 
upstream of the disturbance. This situation can be observed by slowly mov­
ing a suitable obstacle in a basin of water or by observing the waves gener­
ated by a calm stream flowing past a fish line. For the latter reason, this is 
known as the fish-line problem; details may be found in Lamb (1932). Small 
capillary waves will occur upstream of large bodies as well, but usually their 
presence is obscured and of no practical significance.
Alternative derivations and interpretations of the group velocity exist. 
A particularly elegant approach is given by Wehausen and Laitone (1960), 
based on the propagation of a packet of wave energy in a narrow-band spec­
trum. An interpretation based on the kinematic analysis of a general slowlyvarying wave motion is emphasized by Whitham (1974). In section 6.11, 
we shall find that the group velocity emerges in yet another, but related 
sense, in conjunction with Kelvin’s method of stationary phase for approxi­
mating the far-field asymptotic form of wave motions.
6.9  Two-Dimensional Ship Waves
Having developed the analysis of wave energy radiation for plane progres­
sive waves, we can now consider the problem of wave generation by mov­
ing vessels and the associated wave resistance. We begin with the simplest 
case, the two-dimensional motion that would be generated by moving a 
long cylindrical obstacle normal to its axis.
Since our approach will be based on energy conservation, we can ignore 
the details of the flow near the body and focus attention on the wave sys­
tem far downstream. If the body moves with constant velocity U in oth­
erwise calm water and if the motion has reached a steady state, the only 
waves that can exist downstream move with a phase velocity Vp = U. Any 
other waves would either overtake the body, or drop further behind, in an 
unsteady manner. Since the phase velocity is fixed, the wavelength and the 
wave number must take prescribed values; for the deep-water case they are 
given by λ = 2πU2/g and k = g/U2.