attained much higher limits, as noted by Monin and Yaglom (1971). 3. This problem was first solved by Stokes, in 1851, as a means of estimating the drag on a pendulum. 4. This assumption is valid because the governing equation is parabolic. Thus x < l is a sufficient condition, excluding the complicated region near x = l. Physically, the effects of viscosity are diffusive and the local solution in the boundary layer is inde­ pendent of the flow downstream.

Notes
5.  A rigorous justification for simultaneously changing both variables (U, x) to (uτ, δ) 
requires that the Jacobian ∂(U, x)/∂(uτ, δ) be nonzero. This can be verified from the 
empirical 1/7-th power relations to follow.
Chapter 4: The Motion of an Ideal Fluid
1.  A strict interpretation of the material contour is essential to reconcile this state­
ment with lifting-surface theory, and with other inviscid flows where vortices are 
shed into the fluid at a sharp corner.
2.  The interpretation of S + Sε as a single closed surface can be justified by connect­
ing these two separate surfaces with a “tube” of infinitesimal radius, as shown by the 
dashed lines in figure 4.6 (a); there is no contribution to the surface integrals from 
this tube in the limit where the tube radius shrinks to zero.
3.  Since the body is rigid and of constant volume, the source term of order r
−1 must 
vanish.
Chapter 5: Lifting Surfaces
1.  Included here is a contribution proportional to (log A)/A
2, which could not be 
anticipated from Prandtl’s lifting-line equation (142).
2.  This integral represents the downwash on the foil induced by the vortices in the 
wake.
Chapter 6: Waves and Wave Effects
1.  There is a semantic problem here involving the number of dimensions. We shall 
refer to two- and three-dimensional motions of the fluid as in earlier chapters, cor­
responding respectively to one- and two-dimensionality of the free surface elevation 
η(x, z, t).
2.  A trochoid is the trajectory of any point on a circular disc rotating with its periph­
ery in contact with a horizontal plane.
3.  The derivative (114) and the resulting simplicity of (115) imply a fundamental 
relation between the factor G″ in the stationary-phase approximation and the spa­
tial gradient of the wavenumber. This relationship is displayed explicitly in an alter­
native derivation of the stationary-phase approximation given by Lighthill (1965).
4.  It is clear that if the horizontal coordinates of the source position and observa­
tion point are reversed, the flow will be unchanged provided the direction of the 
stream velocity U is also reversed. The dependence on the vertical coordinate and 
source position is less elementary, but in the asymptotic approximation used here 
both of these are in fact exponential.