thus to have a very different form from the fully wetted foil shapes. The latter difference is particularly important at the leading edge where, to avoid both cavitation and separation, a fully wetted foil is designed with a substantial radius of curvature, whereas a supercavitating foil is designed with a sharp leading edge. 5.15 Unsteady Hydrofoil Theory In general, unsteady motions will be accompanied by correspond­ ing changes in the circulation about the foil or about each section of a

Chapter 5
three-dimensional lifting surface. We shall confine our attention here to 
the two-dimensional case, since the situation in three dimensions is quali­
tatively similar except for the addition of suitable trailing vortices. Apply­
ing Kelvin’s theorem to a large contour surrounding the foil and its wake 
during the entire history of its motion, as in figure 5.6, we find that the 
circulation about this contour must be zero. Thus any change in the circula­
tion Γ(t) about the foil must be balanced by an equal and opposite change 
in the vorticity shed into the wake. The starting vortex shown in figure 
5.6 is a particular example where the unsteady effects are restricted to the 
initial acceleration of the foil, but in the more general case vorticity will be 
continuously supplied into the wake.
The existence of a vortex distribution throughout the wake is reminis­
cent of the three-dimensional steady lifting problem of section 5.9. As in 
that case, the vortices in the wake are responsible both for a drag force act­
ing on the foil and for a downwash which affects the lift. However, unlike 
the steady lifting-surface problem with its trailing vortices, the present 
case is purely two-dimensional, and the vortices in the wake must be ori­
ented in the same manner as the bound vorticity on the foil, as shown in 
figure 5.32.
The downwash induced at the foil by the wake is time-dependent; each 
individual vortex element induces a contribution to the downwash which 
diminishes with time as the vortex moves downstream. In this respect, a 
memory is associated with the motion of the foil: the lift force at a given 
moment will depend on the integrated downwash from the entire wake and 
thus on the previous time-history of the motion. This memory effect is one 
of the principal features of the unsteady hydrofoil problem. An analogous 
situation will be encountered in chapter 6, where the unsteady motions of 
Figure 5.32
Unsteady vortex wake behind an oscillating foil. The case shown is for heaving mo­
tion of the foil, with a reduced frequency k = 1.0. The orientation and length of each 
arrow denotes the sign and strength of the vorticity at the corresponding position 
in the wake.