appropriate solution. For polar coordinates (r, θ) in two dimensions, the analog to (68) is the expansion φ θ = + + + = ∞ ∑cos [ / ] log n A r B r A B r n n n n n 1 (70) together with a similar series with cos nθ replaced by sin nθ. This is equiv­ alent to expressing the complex potential in its most general form as a Laurent series plus a logarithmic source term.

Chapter 4
A common feature of (68) and (70) is that two sets of independent 
radial functions arise, one singular at the origin and the other at infin­
ity. The latter is appropriate for internal flows, where the fluid is contained 
within a spherical or circular container with prescribed normal velocity 
on the boundary. However, for external flows in a fluid domain that extends 
to infinity radially, the solutions of Laplace’s equation proportional to rn 
are ruled out, with the exception of a uniform free stream obtained when 
n = 1. On the other hand, for external flows the entire set of solutions sin­
gular at r = 0 is admissible, since the fluid domain is exterior to this point. 
Individual terms in this set are known as multipoles; the source and dipole 
are the first two members. (The next two are quadrupoles and octapoles.) The 
multipole of order n can be derived by differentiating the source potential 
n times.
The method of separation of variables can be applied, using the same 
scheme with more complicated coordinate systems, to determine the flow 
past spheroids and ellipsoids and more generally to solve problems where 
the boundary geometry coincides with one of the coordinate surfaces of the 
separable systems listed above. Details of these problems and the resulting 
solutions are discussed by Lamb (1932) and by Morse and Feshbach (1953). 
The solutions obtained are analogous in form to (68) and (70), with unde­
termined coefficients that must be found from the boundary conditions 
of the problem, but with more complicated special functions representing 
the spatial dependence. Several applications of this technique in the field 
of ship hydrodynamics are included in the collected works of Havelock 
(1963).
4.10  Fixed Bodies and Moving Bodies
In the previous sections, streaming flows have been considered where the 
body is fixed and the fluid at infinity has a uniform constant velocity. 
Except for the change in reference frame, these are identical to correspond­
ing problems where the body moves with constant velocity through oth­
erwise undisturbed fluid, provided the relative velocity between the body 
and the fluid at infinity is the same in both cases. However, the boundary 
conditions must be changed if the fluid velocity is referred consistently to 
a fixed reference frame, and the two solutions will differ by the free-stream 
potential.