force vector is equal in magnitude to the product ρUΓ, with Γ the total circulation about the foil; it also states that this force is normal to the direction of the streaming flow. A more elementary proof of zero drag follows from an energy analysis. The velocity field induced by the foil is steady state in a coordinate system moving with the foil and vanishes at large distances from the foil. The Figure 5.12 Mean-camber lines for NACA a series.

Chapter 5
kinetic energy of the fluid surrounding the foil will move with the foil, and 
there can be no net build-up of energy in the fluid downstream. Thus, no 
work is done in propelling the foil in a steady-state manner, and there can 
be no drag force.
A curious paradox arises in conjunction with the drag force acting on a 
flat-plate foil. Given the geometry of this case, it might be expected that the 
pressure force acts normal to the plate; in that event the drag force must 
equal the product of the lift force and the tangent of the angle of attack. 
However, an additional contribution to the hydrodynamic force in this case 
results from the infinite velocity at the leading edge and the occurrence of 
a corresponding leading-edge suction force. The magnitude of the leadingedge suction force can be calculated from a momentum analysis carried out 
locally near the leading edge, and the magnitude of the resulting upstream 
force is such that the drag component of the normal force is precisely can­
celed. Thus, despite the suggestive geometry, the total hydrodynamic drag 
force is indeed zero, and the force vector is precisely normal to the direction 
of the incident stream.
5.6  Two-Dimensional Source and Vortex Distributions
In the previous sections, vortex distributions have been utilized to represent 
the two-dimensional lifting problem; similarly, source distributions can be 
used to solve the thickness problem. These two problems are related—both 
the source and the vortex are conjugate functions, equal to the real and 
imaginary parts of the complex logarithm. This relationship will be pursued 
here, not only to derive the corresponding solution of the thickness prob­
lem, but also as a necessary first step toward deriving the solution (32) of 
the integral equation (30).
Complex variables will be used here, as in section 4.7, with z = x + iy. 
The complex potential of a source is given in table 4.1, and that of a vortex 
by (23). The combination of these two singularities, situated at the point 
(ξ, 0), is
φ
ψ
π
γ
ξ
+
=
−
−
i
q
i
z

2 (
)log(
). 	
(50)
Here q is the source strength and γ is the vortex strength. Differentiation 
with respect to z gives the corresponding complex velocity