full-scale vessel differ by the Reynolds-number dependent difference in the respective frictionaldrag coefficients. Thus (CD)model > (CD)ship, and the extra thrust required to propel the model must be furnished from the model propeller or from an external force. To preserve the correct thrust and torque coefficients of the model propeller, this extra differential thrust force is generally provided by the towing carriage. However, this cannot account for all of the Reynoldsnumber dependent differences between the model and full-scale ship; in

Model Testing 

particular, the boundary layer of the model will be thicker, and thus the 
wake retardation of the model will be larger.
It is assumed that the model drag D is known from a towing test with­
out the propeller and, similarly, that the open-water characteristics of the 
propeller have been determined from a separate experiment or from charts, 
such as figure 2.10. For the self-propelled test the propeller thrust T is pre­
scribed from the balance of propulsion and drag forces, and the necessary 
torque Q and shaft rotation rate n can be measured from the model.
The retardation of the wake behind the model is measured by the wake 
fraction w. Thus, if U is the forward velocity of the hull through the undis­
turbed water and UA is the effective velocity of advance experienced by the 
propeller in the presence of the hull, Then
w
U
U
A
=
−

/
. 	
(27)
Typically, 0 < w < 0.4; the larger value applies for very full hulls. The wake 
fraction can be measured directly, with the propeller removed, or it can 
be deduced indirectly from the thrust-identity condition, which yields the 
Taylor wake wT. The Taylor wake is determined by substituting the thrust 
coefficient KT, as determined from the self-propelled test, in the open-water 
propeller chart, to determine the advance ratio J and the corresponding 
advance velocity
U
ndJ
A =
. 	
(28)
With this value of UA, the Taylor wake wT is defined by (27).
Since the wake behind the hull is not a parallel inflow with constant 
uniform velocity, the correction of the propeller performance based simply 
on a wake fraction is only approximate. While the thrust coefficients KT 
are defined to be equal, there may be a small difference in the torque coef­
ficients KQ, as shown in figure 2.13. This difference is accounted for by the 
relative rotative efficiency
ηR
Q
OW
Q
SP
K
K
= (
)
(
)
, 	
(29)
where the subscripts OW and SP denote the open-water and self-propelled 
conditions. In general, 1.0 < ηR < 1.1.
In the converse effect of the propeller on the hull, the suction of the 
propeller generally reduces the pressure at the stern and hence increases 
the drag force