includes an additional “buoyancy” force proportional to the displaced volume of fluid ∀ and associated with the pressure gradient of the fluid in the absence of the body. For l/λ ≪ 1 it follows that C m gl M ( )/ , + ∀ ρ ρ (46) Cd 0. (47) Thus, in the special case where A ≪ l ≪ λ, the wave force is given by the approximation F m U ( ) . 11 + ∀ ρ (48)

Chapter 2
When the body is small compared to the wave amplitude, however, 
the situation is fundamentally different. From (43) and (37) viscous drag 
forces will be dominant, and an obvious representation of the wave force is 
given by
F
l U U C
R
D
= 1


ρ
| |
( ). 	
(49)
In this expression the square of the velocity U has been replaced by the 
product U|U| to ensure that the viscous drag force (49) acts in the same 
direction as the fluid velocity. The utility of the approximation (49) is 
diminished because the Reynolds number is itself a function of the instan­
taneous velocity. However, (49) is relatively useful for bluff bodies, where 
the viscous drag coefficient is not sensitive to the Reynolds number.
The intermediate case, where A/l is a quantity of order one, is one of the 
most important and least understood problems of this field. It is impor­
tant because many structures, such as the risers of offshore platforms and 
other cylindrical pilings, have diameters of about the same magnitude as 
the typical wave amplitude. In this regime viscous and inertial effects are 
of comparable magnitude, and one must return to the exact force coeffi­
cient (41). However, the inherent interactions between viscous and inertial 
effects have not prevented engineers from simplifying expressions for the 
wave force. The most common approximation is Morison’s formula, which 
assumes that the total wave force is the sum of the inertial force (48) and 
the viscous force (49),
F
m
U
l C U U
D
=
+ ∀
+
(
)
.




ρ
ρ

| | 	
(50)
Since the validity of each term in (50) is restricted to a regime where A/l is 
respectively small or large, the justification for Morison’s formula is strictly 
pragmatic and must rest with experimental confirmation.
Considerable experimental effort has been devoted to validating Mori­
son’s formula (50). For submerged bodies an approximation similar to (50) 
appears valid for engineering purposes, provided the coefficients are deter­
mined experimentally and for appropriate values of the Reynolds number 
and the parameter A/l. For bodies such as vertical surface-piercing pilings, 
no satisfactory experimental confirmation of (50) exists; the reasons for this 
are not understood adequately. Surveys of this subject have been made by 
Hogben (1974) and Milgram (1976).