the more general functional relation (7) for finite depth. Since the phase velocity Vp depends upon the wavelength, it follows that water waves of different wavelengths or periods will propagate at different phase velocities and are thus dispersive. Long waves will travel faster than short waves, and a spectrum of waves will constantly change its appear­ ance in a manner obvious from observation of ocean waves. The mono­ chromatic wave system shown in figure 2.1 is an exception, where the

Chapter 2
free-surface profile can propagate without change of form because only one 
wavelength is present.
Other physical properties of secondary importance include the viscosity 
of the water, the surface tension of the air-water interface, and the prop­
erties of the air. The fluid viscosity exerts a small dissipative effect, com­
parable to the friction of the pendulum bearing, and typical water waves 
can travel for hundreds or thousands of wavelengths without significant 
attenuation. Qualitatively this could be anticipated by forming a nondi­
mensional viscosity ratio vg-1/2λ-3/2, which is equal to 3 × 10−4 for λ = 1 m and 
is even smaller for longer wavelengths.
The surface tension of the air-water interface exerts a tensile force, per 
unit width of the free surface, proportional to the curvature of the free sur­
face and analogous to the restoring force of waves on a string or membrane. 
A suitable nondimensional parameter is Ts/ρgλ2 where the surface tension 
Ts for an air-water interface is about 0.07 N/m. Thus Ts/ρgλ2 is on the order 
of 10−5 for λ = 1 m, and smaller for longer waves. It follows that surface ten­
sion effects are negligible for all but the shortest waves or ripples.
Generally one can ignore the effects of the air on water waves since the 
air density is on the order of 10−3 times that of water. An important excep­
tion is the process by which ocean waves are generated by the wind, but 
that is a complicated problem beyond the scope of this text.
2.4  Drag Force on a Sphere
Dimensional analysis is particularly useful in studying the forces exerted 
by the fluid on a moving body. As our first example we shall consider the 
drag force acting upon a sphere moving with constant velocity U through a 
viscous fluid of unbounded extent. Of course, no fluid is truly unbounded, 
and this restriction implies that the sphere is very small compared to the 
distance to the nearest boundary or other body within the fluid.
If the surface of the sphere is smooth, the only length scale of the prob­
lem is the sphere diameter. The drag force D must be a unique function2 of 
the diameter d, the sphere velocity U, the fluid density ρ, and the kinematic 
viscosity coefficient υ. In the dimensional form
D
f d U
=
( ,
, , ).
ρ ν
	
(10)