following year, the entire research division of Det Norske Veritas (now DNV GL) attended the course. This time, Enok Palm lectured the course himself. “I just can’t ask a master’s student to teach such an important course to the scientific leaders of Veritas,” he told me. I was given the duty of leading the exercises instead. Reading this book—a real classic—has been the most defining experi­ ence of my scientific career. I use it frequently in my teaching and scientific

xii 
Foreword
work. This text is a continuous font of inspiration for a master’s or PhD 
project.
How does one define marine hydrodynamics? First, it’s important to 
understand the meaning of offshore engineering. Put simply, offshore 
engineering deals with the design, construction, and safety considerations, 
including insurance, of both stationary and moving structures at sea. 
Regarding the first question, marine hydrodynamics defines the theoretical 
framework of offshore engineering. Marine hydrodynamics is an extensive 
subject as it treats the hydrodynamics in relation to all conceivable geom­
etries exposed to the forces in the ocean environment. This includes the 
forces from the waves as well as those acting on lifting surfaces, either in 
water or in air. Sailors, rowers, canoeists, and kayakers are all faced with 
the same challenges: how does one reduce wave or frictional resistance, 
and optimize sail, rudder shape, or paddle motion? These are all examples 
of marine hydrodynamics. Calculating extreme loads and thereby ensur­
ing the survival of structures exposed to extreme conditions—such as the 
record high Draupner wave, detected in the North Sea on New Year’s Day 
1995 with a crest height of more than 18 meters, a wave height of more 
than 25 meters, and a wavelength slightly exceeding 200 meters—is the 
ultimate goal. (Note that the design waves of the platforms in the North Sea 
are stronger than the Draupner wave.)
Stationary bodies are either fixed to the seafloor or floating on the sur­
face with a stiff or slack mooring maintaining their position. There is a 
variety of such bodies, including all kinds of ships, barges, offshore plat­
forms in transit from one position to another, and other objects towed 
by ships. Offshore wind turbines are more recently studied geometries. In 
most cases these are organized in large wind farms that are mounted on 
the seafloor as at Horns Rev 1 and 2 in Danish waters, and at Dudgeon on 
the coast of the United Kingdom. Hywind, developed by the Norwegian 
oil and gas company Statoil, is an offshore wind turbine prototype that 
floats on a spar buoy. The current target wing span of these geometries 
is twice that of an Airbus A380! Other geometries in offshore engineer­
ing include cages for aquaculture, which may be either closed or open. 
Making them larger and sufficiently strong enough to be placed in harsh 
ocean environments is a new development in the fish farming industry. 
New development of coastal infrastructure would require road crossings of 
fjords. Proposed bridges would be supported by floating, moored pontoons;