D ρ = ( , / ). (13) Here S is the surface area of the plate; we have chosen this in preference, say, to B2 or l2 because we expect the viscous drag to be roughly propor­ tional to the surface area over which viscous shear stresses act. This expecta­ tion is confirmed by the fact that, for Reynolds numbers on the order of 105 to 1010, the drag coefficient is relatively insensitive to the ratio B/l. This is

Chapter 2
not a foreseeable consequence of dimensional analysis; instead, it must be 
explained from the characteristic thickness of the boundary layer.
Experimentally determined frictional-drag coefficients CF are shown in 
figure 2.3 for various flat plates, along with the semiempirical equation 
determined by Schoenherr:
0 242

.
/
log (
).
C
RC
F
F
=
	
(14)
Here the coefficient has been changed from CD to CF because we must dis­
tinguish subsequently between total drag and frictional drag. Once again, 
the validity of the dimensional analysis is confirmed by the collapse of data 
from diverse experiments both in water and in air.
There is a noticeable scatter of data in the transition range of Reynolds 
numbers between 105 and 2 × 106. In that range, the flow changes from a 
smooth laminar regime to the turbulent regime that persists throughout 
the range of higher Reynolds numbers. In this transition range an impor­
tant mechanism that triggers turbulence is the smoothness of the body 
surface. Thus, the drag of rough plates shifts to the turbulent value at lower 
Reynolds numbers; for very smooth plates, laminar flow can be maintained 
longer. Similar results occur if the ambient flow is not uniform.
The principal consequence of turbulence is to increase the momentum 
defect of the boundary layer and the resulting frictional drag on the flat 
plate. This is precisely opposite to the effect noted for a sphere where the 
increase in frictional drag is insignificant compared with the decrease in 
pressure drag. That the magnitude of the frictional drag coefficient shown 
in figure 2.3 is two orders of magnitude less than that of the drag coeffi­
cient for a sphere emphasizes the practical importance of streamlined body 
shape.
2.6  Viscous Drag on General Bodies
The drag on more general bodies can be determined from tests of geometri­
cally similar models, or geosims, provided that the Reynolds number for 
model and full-scale bodies is the same. However, practical difficulties may 
prevent this scaling procedure from being carried out. Since it is difficult 
to find nonvolatile liquids appreciably less viscous than water, the ratio of 
model velocity to full-scale velocity must be inversely proportional to the 
ratio of the lengths. As an example, let us consider a ship or submarine of