of matched asymptotic expansions will be employed in sec­ tion 7.2 to solve the longitudinal-flow problem. Subsequently, in section 7.3, we shall return to the lateral-flow problem, which is in some respects simpler and more useful, to analyze the lateral force acting along the body length. Before treating the longitudinal-flow problem in detail, it should be noted that the need for a three-dimensional outer solution does not arise for the lateral flow. Essentially this distinction occurs because no net flux

Chapter 7
is associated with the boundary condition (18) for lateral motion, and thus 
there is no source term in the local solution of the lateral flow problem. 
The potential Φ3 behaves for large r as a two-dimensional dipole, as in (20) 
for a body of revolution or (4.129) for arbitrary body profiles. This dipole 
potential vanishes at infinity, and thus is consistent with (8). Strictly, this 
behavior is not identical to the more appropriate three-dimensional dipole 
(4.123), but the distinction does not affect the leading-order slender-body 
solution for the lateral-flow problem.
7.2  Longitudinal Motion
The longitudinal problem, associated with the steady forward motion 
of the body, can be solved most readily in the moving coordinate system 
(x, y, z). Here the body is in its stretched-straight position and is rigid. In 
accordance with (4.101), the potential due to the body disturbance will be 
of the form
Φ = U
x y z
φ1( , , ). 	
(23)
We shall seek a solution of this problem using the method of matched 
asymptotic expansions, where the inner and outer solutions are treated as 
complementary approximations, each of which is valid in its own domain. 
Thus the inner solution Φ1 is governed by the two-dimensional Laplace 
equation (12) and the body boundary condition (17), but not by the con­
dition (8) at infinity. Conversely, the outer solution φ1 is governed by the 
three-dimensional Laplace equation and by the condition (8) at infinity, 
but need not satisfy the body boundary condition. These two solutions will 
be consistent provided they can be matched in an overlap region εl ≪ r ≪ l 
far from the body in the inner region but very close to the body in the outer 
region. Thus the matching requirement
ϕ
ε


≪
≪
Φ ,
,
l
r
l 	
(24)
effectively replaces the missing boundary condition at infinity in the inner 
problem and at the body in the outer problem.
This method is useful because the two separate problems are simpler 
to solve, compared to the exact solution valid everywhere throughout 
the fluid. The inner solution is simplified because it is two dimensional,