zk. Equation (112) gives a form of the two-dimensional velocity field result­ ing from a line vortex along the z-axis, which can be generalized to an arbitrary three-dimensional vortex filament of strength Γ. Let the vortex filament be situated on a contour C, with dl the differential element of integration along C as in figure 5.17. Then by analogy with (112) we can define the velocity V = − × ∫ Γ π R d C l R , (113)

Chapter 5
where R is now the vector to the point (x, y, z) from each point along the 
curve of integration, as defined in figure 5.17. This more general integral 
defines a velocity field that is irrotational and divergenceless except on the 
contour C. Near this contour, it possesses the same singularity as the twodimensional vortex (112), since locally the curve approximates a straight 
line and near the curve the integral will be dominated by the value of the 
integrand as R → 0.
Equation (113) is, therefore, the velocity field induced by a threedimensional vortex filament of strength Γ situated on the curve C. This 
result, well known in electromagnetic theory as the law of Biot-Savart, 
relates the magnetic field to the current in a conducting filament. We have 
derived it intuitively by guessing and then verifying the final answer. A 
more systematic derivation, in terms of an arbitrary volume distribution 
of vorticity reduced ultimately to a line vortex, can be found in Batchelor 
(1967). An extensive analysis of three-dimensional vortex fields is given by 
Brard (1972).
5.9  Three-Dimensional Planar Lifting Surfaces
For three-dimensional lifting surfaces and hydrofoils, the powerful method 
of complex function theory must be abandoned; the real variable z and 
dummy coordinate ζ are used to denote the coordinate along the span of 
the foil. However, the thin-wing approximation can be retained if the slope 
of the foil is sufficiently small over its entire surface (except at the leading 
edge!). A linearized problem can be formulated in exactly the same manner 
as for the two-dimensional case in section 5.2. The thickness problem can 
be solved again in terms of a suitable source distribution, and the lifting 
Figure 5.17
Definition sketch for equation (113), showing the position vector R and differential 
line element dl along a vortex filament situated on the contour C.