of thick­ ness yu − yl, at zero angle of attack. On the other hand, from (21), ϕo is the potential of an asymmetric flow, past an arc of zero thickness defined by the curve y y y u t = + 2 ( ), or the mean-camber line. Both problems are illustrated in figure 5.8. The original problem has now been decomposed into two parts, one rep­ resenting the effects of thickness and the other representing the effects of

Chapter 5
camber and angle of attack. Because the pressure distribution is symmetric 
in the thickness problem, there can be no lift force or moment in this case; 
hence thickness has no direct effect on the lift and moment. Thickness has 
practical effects only when modifications of the pressure distribution affect 
separation or cavitation. In particular, the effect of thickness will be impor­
tant near the leading edge, where the mean-camber line contains a sharp 
edge, not present in the real foil with finite leading-edge radius. Thus, in 
the flow past the mean-camber line we must anticipate an infinite velocity 
at the leading edge which will not occur in practice because of thickness 
effects, but which, if it did occur, would be devastating from the stand­
points of separation and cavitation. It is therefore permissible, in the lifting 
problem of the mean-camber line, to ignore an infinite velocity at the lead­
ing edge, on the premise that this singularity will be removed by the effects 
of thickness. An entirely different situation will occur at the sharp trailing 
edge; an infinite velocity here is prevented by viscous effects in a real fluid 
and by the Kutta condition in the ideal-fluid problem.
Since the thickness and lifting problems can be separated, and since the 
lift force and moment are independent of the thickness, we will examine 
primarily the solution of the lifting problem. The corresponding solution 
of the thickness problem, in terms of a source distribution, will be described 
briefly in section 5.6.
5.3  The Lifting Problem
Here we focus our attention on the flow past the mean-camber line and 
the resulting lift force and moment. It is convenient to denote the vertical 
coordinate of the mean-camber line by η =
+

2 (
)
y
y
u
l . The corresponding 
boundary condition on the cut is
Figure 5.8
Definitions of thickness and lifting problems.