floats on a spar buoy. The current target wing span of these geometries is twice that of an Airbus A380! Other geometries in offshore engineer­ ing include cages for aquaculture, which may be either closed or open. Making them larger and sufficiently strong enough to be placed in harsh ocean environments is a new development in the fish farming industry. New development of coastal infrastructure would require road crossings of fjords. Proposed bridges would be supported by floating, moored pontoons;

John Grue 
xiii
submerged floating tunnels are another alternative. Wave power devices 
are another example of structures where the subject of marine hydrody­
namics is relevant, and where the design of successful structures must be 
based on this subject.
This textbook is ideal for a masters- or PhD-level course. Students using 
this book should also have completed courses in introductory mathematics, 
classical physics, and field theory. Additionally, a course in fluid mechanics 
provides a foundation to build upon with the material contained herein. 
Most introductory courses in mathematics have some components of com­
plex theory and provide a sufficient background for the more advanced 
exercises in the book; a full course in complex analysis may help the reader 
but is not required for a good learning outcome.
The highlight of the book is the second half of chapter 6, which intro­
duces the subject of wave effects. The primary goal is to calculate the 
responses of a floating body exposed to incoming waves in the six degrees 
of freedom: heave, sway, surge, roll, pitch, and yaw. Chapter 6, much like 
the rest of the book, is self-consistent, with the required background of 
wave theory—including concepts like superposition, group velocity, mass 
and energy flux, and third-order Stokes wave theory—given in the first half 
of the chapter. On the basis of potential theory, the matrix equation of the 
body responses includes the forces and moments due to added mass, wave 
damping, hydrostatics, and wave excitation. Perturbation-wise, the wavebody interaction problem is linearized and the forces and motions are mod­
eled at each spectral frequency, a common assumption and decomposition 
that is used in marine hydrodynamics. The method provides a platform for 
a rich mathematical analysis in which the wave effects and responses are 
analyzed at the fundamental frequency. The resonance frequencies in the 
vertical modes of motion where the hydrostatic forces balance the inertia 
forces are defined. The linear analysis corresponds to the basic calculation 
method used in offshore engineering. Quadratic and higher-order wave 
effects may be studied using other texts.
The introduction of Morison’s equation—a coefficient-based force for­
mulation, particularly suitable for slender geometries—is motivated by the 
dimensional analysis in chapter 2. It is directly related to the long-wave 
analysis of the wave effects part of chapter 6. The viscous drag term included 
in Morison’s equation is not modeled by the potential theory analysis of 
chapter 6, however. Chapter 2 introduces the concept of added mass—an