RG θ θ θ θ θ = ′′ + = ′′ − ( / )sec ( sin ) cos ( cos ) . (114) Using the last result, we can recast (111) in the relatively simple form3 D U A d = −∫ πρ θ θ θ π π ( ) cos . / / (115) Equation (115) expresses the wave resistance of a moving vessel as the weighted integral of the square of the wave amplitude. The factor cos3θ

Chapter 6
implies that the dominant portion of the resistance will be associated with 
the transverse waves.
An alternative derivation of (115) can be based on the energy flux pass­
ing through a pair of longitudinal planes z = constant on both sides of the 
ship. The integrand of (108) is then replaced by A2 (Vgsinθ)dx. An approach 
independent of the stationary-phase approximation results from substitu­
tion of the free-wave potential corresponding to (89) in the energy-flux 
integral (74). The derivation for a transverse plane x = constant is outlined 
by Havelock (1963, pp. 391–393).
As a result of the positive-definite nature of·(115), the effects of interfer­
ence are limited, and one cannot expect to find dramatic results of the type 
illustrated in the two-dimensional case by figure 6.13. Waves generated at 
different locations along the ship may still interfere, but in a manner that 
depends on θ and on the point of observation in the wake. By judicious 
design or chance, the wave amplitude may vanish at discrete positions in 
the wake. This is illustrated in figure 6.16 where the nodal values of the 
diverging wave system are indicated by the 180° phase shift along a few 
radial lines. Additional nodes may be expected for the shorter wavelengths 
as θ → 90°, but these are obscured and of little significance to (115). In 
any event, these nodes occur only for discrete values of θ. In general, A(θ) 
will be nonzero, contributing to a positive and nonvanishing value of the 
drag (115).
To utilize (115), the wave amplitude function A(θ) must be predicted 
from theory or measured in a suitable experiment. These possibilities are 
described separately in sections 6.13 and 6.14.
6.13  Thin-Ship Theory of Wave Resistance
The thin-ship theory of wave resistance was introduced by J.H. Michell in 
1898 as a purely analytic approach for predicting the wave resistance of 
ships. The essential assumption is that the hull is thin, that is, the beam is 
small compared to all other characteristic lengths of the problem. The result­
ing solution can be expressed in terms of a distribution of sources on the 
centerplane of the hull, with the local source strength proportional to the 
longitudinal slope of the hull. This solution is analogous to the thickness 
problem of thin-wing theory, as discussed in chapter 5. However, the shipwave problem is complicated by the need to choose the source potential, in