bodies can be determined from tests of geometri­ cally similar models, or geosims, provided that the Reynolds number for model and full-scale bodies is the same. However, practical difficulties may prevent this scaling procedure from being carried out. Since it is difficult to find nonvolatile liquids appreciably less viscous than water, the ratio of model velocity to full-scale velocity must be inversely proportional to the ratio of the lengths. As an example, let us consider a ship or submarine of

Model Testing 

Figure 2.3
Schoenherr’s flat-plate frictional drag coefficient, compared with various experimental results and the Blasius boundary-layer theory. Note 
that transition occurs between R = 10
5 and 2 × 10
6, depending on the plate roughness and ambient turbulence. For references to the experi­
mental data see Todd (1967), figure 3.

Chapter 2
100 m length, moving at 10 m/s or 20 knots; if a 10 m model of the same 
vessel is to be tested in water at the same Reynolds number, it must move 
with a velocity of 100 m/s or 200 knots.
This difficulty is usually overcome by separating the total viscous drag 
into two components, frictional drag and pressure drag. These can be 
defined as the longitudinal components of the forces acting on the body 
due respectively to tangential shear stresses and normal pressure stresses. 
We assume that the tangential stress is the only component affected by the 
Reynolds number and, moreover, that the resulting frictional-drag force 
is equal to that of a flat plate of equal area and Reynolds number. The 
remaining force component, due to normal pressure stresses acting on the 
body surface, will depend on the form of the body; for this reason it is 
often called the form drag or pressure drag. In the case of a streamlined body 
the form or pressure drag can be assumed independent of the Reynolds 
number over the range where the boundary layer is thin compared to the 
body dimensions, typically for R > 105. On the other hand, for a bluff 
body the possible dependence of the point of separation on R must be 
recognized.
With these assumptions, the total drag coefficient can be written in the 
form
C
R
C
R
C
D
F
P
( )
( )
,
=
+
	
(15)
where CF is the flat-plate frictional-drag coefficient defined in the last 
section, and plotted for a wide range of Reynolds numbers in figure 2.3. The 
pressure-drag coefficient Cp can be determined, for the body in question, 
by performing a model test at a convenient Reynolds number and by using 
data such as that in figure 2.3 to predict the corresponding value of CF.
For streamlined three-dimensional bodies with maximum thickness less 
than about one fifth of the length, the frictional drag is dominant and 
the drag coefficient can be predicted from the flat-plate drag coefficient 
CF. The pressure drag is more important for two-dimensional cylinders or 
struts, because of the increased obstruction of the flow past the body in two 
dimensions. Figure 2.4 shows the total drag coefficient for a circular cylin­
der, two streamlined struts with thickness-length ratios of 1/2 and 1/4, and 
the limiting case of zero thickness given by twice the flat-plate frictional 
drag coefficient. This figure illustrates the conflicting roles of transition to