the fluid motion. Customarily, the first two are employed in the forms F U gl R Ul Ul = = = = = Froude Number /( ) Reynolds Number / / 1 2 / , , ρ µ ν where ν = μ/ρ is the kinematic viscosity coefficient of the fluid. A short table of the density and viscosity coefficients for water and air is given in the appendix. Typical values for the kinematic viscosity ν are 10−6 m2/s (10−5

Chapter 1
ft2/s) for water and 1.5 × 10−5 m2/s (1.5 × 10−4 ft2/s) for air. That this coef­
ficient is small when expressed in terms of conventional units implies that 
the Reynolds number R will be large; hence viscous forces will be negligible 
relative to inertial forces. This is generally true, but one must be more cau­
tious before concluding that viscosity can be completely ignored. In fact, 
viscosity can be neglected for the bulk of the fluid but must be included in 
singular regions such as the boundary layer very close to a body.
In this analysis we have tacitly assumed steady motion and hence con­
stant characteristic velocity U. If instead the motion is oscillatory in time, as 
in the case of a buoy oscillating in a seaway, then the characteristic velocity 
U should be replaced by the combination ωl, where ω is the frequency of 
oscillations in radians per unit time. The counterpart of the Froude num­
ber for such motions is the nondimensional frequency parameter ω(l/g)1/2. 
Alternatively, we can use the ratio λ/l, where λ is the wavelength, or dis­
tance between successive wave crests, since λ can be explicitly related to ω 
(λ = 2πg/ω2 for waves in deep water).
Other important parameters arise when we examine the kinematic and 
thermodynamic aspects of the fluid. The most familiar of these is the Mach 
number of aerodynamics, which is the ratio between the velocity U and 
the speed of sound in the fluid medium; it arises from considerations of 
the elasticity or compressibility of the fluid. These effects are not impor­
tant in the motions and behavior of ocean vehicles because water is not 
significantly compressible at the speeds of interest; in terms of the Mach 
number we note that the speed of sound in water is on the order of 1,500 
m/s or 3,000 knots, which implies a negligibly small Mach number for 
water—based craft and thus insignificant compressibility effects. On the 
other hand we must consider in certain circumstances the possibility of 
cavitation, for when the pressure in the fluid is reduced below the vapor 
pressure pν, the physical state of the fluid abruptly changes to that of a gas. 
Thus, while the fluid is extremely inelastic in compression, it cannot nor­
mally sustain significant tension. Dimensional considerations suggest the 
cavitation number
σ
ρ
ν
=
−
p
p
U



2 ,
which is a measure of the likelihood of cavitation and parametrically 
describes the subsequent details. Here p0 is a characteristic pressure level