downwash velocity equal to UαT, Thus, it makes no difference whether the body terminates at the posi­ tion of maximum span or continues downstream with decreasing span, provided the local angle of attack is constant. For this reason, the low aspect ratio theory holds for uncambered lifting surfaces of more general planform, if the maximum span is used in (48). In this particular case, there is no lift force on the portion of the body downstream of the maximum span.

Hydrodynamics of Slender Bodies 

The extension of slender-body theory to account for the interaction of 
the afterbody with vortex sheets shed upstream has been carried out by 
Newman and Wu (1973) in the general case where the local lateral veloc­
ity of the body differs from the downwash of the trailing vortices. Vortex 
sheets that occur due to separation are analyzed by Fink and Soh (1974). In 
both cases, the vorticity along the body is convected with the free-stream 
velocity U, and “memory” effects will occur in the unsteady case as in the 
two-dimensional lifting-surface theory.
7.4  Ship Maneuvering: The Hydrodynamic Forces
The hydrodynamic forces of significance during a ship maneuver are pri­
marily the sway force and yaw moment. Anticipating large excursions in 
the horizontal plane, as in the turning trajectory of a ship, it is customary 
to employ a coordinate system fixed with respect to the ship. In this frame 
of reference, the forward velocity is of order one, whereas the sway and yaw 
velocities are assumed small by comparison. The remaining three modes of 
rigid-body motion are ignored, on the presumption that changes in the roll 
angle, heave, and pitch of the ship will be unimportant.
We shall employ the same coordinates and notation here as in chapter 
4. The body is assumed rigid, and the (x, y, z) axes are fixed with respect to 
the ship such that x is positive forward, y upward, and z to starboard. The 
three nonzero velocity components of the ship are U1 (forward), U3 (sway), 
and Ω2 (yaw). These are indicated in figure 7.3, together with the sway force 
F3 and yaw moment M2, as well as the rudder angle δR defined to be positive 
for a turn to port.
Figure 7.3
Horizontal motions of a ship as seen from above.

Chapter 7
This convention differs from the standard throughout the field of ship 
maneuvering, where the y-axis is positive to starboard and the z-axis is 
directed vertically downward. In the standard notation, as described by 
Mandel (1967), the sway velocity v and force Y are identical to U3 and F3, 
but the yaw velocity r and moment N differ in sign from Ω2 and M2.
Ship maneuvers are relatively slow, compared to vertical motions in 
waves, due to the physical limitations of the control systems involved. Thus 
it is reasonable to assume that the sway velocity U3 and yaw velocity Ω2 are 
slowly changing functions of time and small by comparison to the scale 
of the forward speed. Neglecting wave effects associated with the steady 
forward velocity, the lateral flow associated with the sway and yaw motions 
can be analyzed on the basis of the low-frequency limit of the free-surface 
condition; that is, wave effects are neglected and the free surface is replaced 
by a rigid horizontal plane. The appropriate image of the ship hull can be 
inferred from figure 6.21, and for lateral motions it is appropriate to treat 
the wetted portion of the hull as the lower half of a rigid double body, as 
shown in figure 7.4.
In addition, it will be assumed that the fluid motion is ideal, and thus 
viscous effects can be ignored. Boundary layer phenomena and the related 
frictional drag are of no significance here, but if the angle of attack between 
the ship hull and the water becomes large, viscous separation will occur in 
the cross-flow past the hull. This is a nonlinear phenomenon, beyond the 
scope of our analysis, which must be regarded as a possible limitation of 
the theory.
With these preliminaries, we proceed to analyze the ship hull and its 
image as a rigid double body, of slender form, which can develop a lateral 
lift force in accordance with the results of section 3. Since U3 and Ω2 are the 
sway and yaw velocities defined with respect to the body fixed reference 
frame, the total lateral velocity is
Figure 7.4
Elevation of the ship hull and its double-body image above the free surface.