the lift and drag coefficients can be obtained experimentally by placing a scale model in a wind tunnel or water tunnel. The angle of attack can be varied by a suitable arrangement and the force components measured with dynamometers. Here again, however, there is a practical difficulty in preserving the full-scale Reynolds number. Thus the drag is generally treated as for a streamlined nonlifting body, accounting for the Reynolds number dependence simply in terms of the frictional drag of a

Chapter 2
flat plate at zero angle of attack. The remaining pressure drag is assumed to 
depend only on the angle of attack, and therefore
C
R
C
R
C
D
F
P
( , )
( )
( ).
α
α

+
	
(18)
Usually the lift coefficient is assumed to depend only on the angle of attack, 
and to be independent of the Reynolds number, in the form
C
R
C
L
L
( , )
( ).
α
α

	
(19)
In practice, many hydrofoils are of large span, relative to their chord. 
Under these circumstances the flow at each section along the span is 
approximately two-dimensional, and the total three-dimensional force 
coefficients can be estimated by integration of the sectional lift and drag 
coefficients along the span. The differential projected area dS is propor­
tional to the product of the local chord length and the differential element 
of the distance along the span. Thus the two-dimensional sectional lift and 
drag coefficients nondimensionalized in terms of the local chord lengths 
are consistent with the definition of the total force coefficients based on 
the planform area S.
Typical experimental results for the sectional lift and drag coefficients 
are reproduced in figures 2.6 and 2.7, for the foil geometry shown in fig­
ure 2.5. The validity of the approximations (18–19), over a limited range 
of Reynolds numbers, can be judged from figures 2.6 and 2.7. For small 
angles of attack the lift coefficient shown in figure 2.6 is insensitive to the 
Reynolds number, and CL increases in a linear manner with the angle of 
attack. As the angle of attack increases, however, the streamlined effect of 
the foil diminishes, and ultimately separation, or stall, occurs with a dra­
matic reduction in the lift coefficient. The point at which stall takes place 
is sensitive to the Reynolds number, as well as to the ambient turbulence of 
the fluid and to the roughness of the foil surface; this situation is analogous 
to the drag coefficient for a sphere or other bluff body.
Figure 2.7 shows the drag coefficient. For small positive or negative 
angles of attack where the lift force is small, the drag coefficient is insensi­
tive to the Reynolds number and takes a value comparable to the flat plate 
frictional drag coefficient. As stall is approached, the drag goes up apprecia­
bly and in a manner sensitive to the Reynolds number. Since the magnitude 
of the drag coefficient is small by comparison to the lift, these effects are of 
less importance.