form of a perfect differential Ōłé Ōłé Ōłé Ōłé+ Ōłé Ōłé Ōłé Ōłé ’Ż½ ’ŻŁ’Ż¼ ’ŻČ ’ŻĖ’ŻĘ= ŌłÆ Ōłé Ōłé + x t x x x p gx i j j i Žå Žå Žå Žü Žü ( ). (25) Integrating this with respect to the three space variables xi gives Ōłé Ōłé+ Ōłé Ōłé Ōłé Ōłé = ŌłÆ + + Žå Žå Žå Žü Žü t x x p gx C t j j ( ) ( ). (26)

Chapter 4
The ŌĆ£constantŌĆØ in (26) is independent of the space coordinates but may 
depend on time. This constant can be absorbed into the velocity potential 
by redefining the latter as
Žå
Žå
ŌĆ▓ =
ŌłÆŌł½C t dt
t
( )
. 	
(27)
Since the difference between ŽĢ and ŽĢ' is a function only of time, the gradi┬Ł
ent is not affected and either of these functions is an equally suitable veloc┬Ł
ity potential from the standpoint of (15). Substituting (27) in (26) leaves the 
form of BernoulliŌĆÖs equation unchanged in terms of the velocity potential 
ŽĢ', but the constant C(t) no longer appears. In other words, the value of C(t) 
is related to a corresponding constant in the velocity potential which has 
no effect on the velocity vector, and C(t) may be chosen arbitrarily. C(t) can 
be set equal to zero and deleted entirely from BernoulliŌĆÖs equation, or it 
can be set equal to some desired value such as the atmospheric pressure or 
other relevant ambient pressure. In the remainder of this chapter, we shall 
delete C(t) entirely.
Both forms of BernoulliŌĆÖs equation, (21) and (26), include in common 
the dynamic pressure ŌłÆ1


ŽüV  and the hydrostatic pressure ŌłÆŽügx2. The 
former expresses that the pressure is reduced in regions of high velocity 
in accordance with the well-known Venturi effect. The hydrostatic term, 
anticipated in section 3.9, represents the simple increase in pressure with 
depth, equal to the static weight per unit area of the fluid above this point.
4.4ŌĆā Boundary Conditions
The distinction between different types of fluid motions results from the 
conditions imposed on the boundaries of the fluid domain. Thus we must 
relate the physical conditions on these boundaries to appropriate math┬Ł
ematical statements.
As in chapter 3, two different types of boundary conditions must be dis┬Ł
cussed: a kinematic condition corresponding to a statement regarding the 
velocity of the fluid on the boundary and a dynamic boundary condition 
corresponding to a statement about the forces on the boundary. Unlike 
the viscous case, there are now fewer conditions to impose, because in the 
present case there are no shear stresses acting within the fluid.