These complicated higher-order effects largely cancel each other, and to order εl/2 the total force due to heave and the moment due to pitch are correctly given by (106) and (107) respectively. The analysis of Ogilvie and Tuck (1969) does reveal additional contribu­ tions to the cross-coupling coefficients, for the heave force due to pitch and the pitch moment due to heave, involving integrals of (Φ2)2 over the free surface. These are re-derived from an energy analysis by Wang (1976).

Hydrodynamics of Slender Bodies 

Computations have been carried out by Faltinsen (1974), who shows 
improved agreement of the resulting cross-coupling coefficients with exper­
iments. The net effect of these additional terms on the pitch and heave 
motions in waves is not well established.
In essence, the results (105–107) with the zero-speed two-dimensional 
added-mass and damping coefficients are relatively simple to use and give 
useful engineering predictions. The more complete results of Ogilvie and 
Tuck (1969) are superior from the mathematical standpoint, but their prac­
tical value is open to debate. The simple approach includes some forwardspeed effects, which are identical to those associated with the lateral force 
acting on a slender body in an unbounded fluid. The additional forwardspeed effects included by Ogilvie and Tuck (1969) result from the free sur­
face. Apparently the latter are relatively unimportant, but this hypothesis 
lacks a rational justification.
The exciting force and moment can be analyzed with a similar approach, 
but under more restrictive assumptions. Assuming the forward speed U = 
O(l), with respect to ε, and the frequency of encounter ω = O(ε−1/2), the only 
possible estimates for ω0 and k compatible with (93) and the dispersion rela­
tion k
g
= ω0
2 /
 are k = O(ε−1/2) and ω0 = O(ε−1/4). Thus the incident wavelength 
2π/k must be short compared to the ship length, but long compared to the 
beam.
The exciting force and moment are determined from the solution of the 
diffraction problem, where the oscillatory potential consists of the incident 
wave ϕ0, plus a scattering potential ϕ7, as in (6.123). The contributions to 
the exciting force from these two potentials can be treated separately. The 
Froude-Krylov force, associated with the pressure field of the incident wave 
system, can be obtained directly from (95) in the form
′ =
−
+
−
∫
F
gA
ikx
i t
ky
ikz
n dl
y
y
x
B

ρ
θ
ω
θ
exp(
cos
)
exp(
sin )
.
( )
Σ
	
(108)
This integral can be evaluated numerically, for a prescribed section ∑B (x), 
and no further approximation of the Froude-Krylov force is necessary from 
the computational standpoint. However, since k = O(ε−1/2), it follows that 
(ky, kz) = O(ε1/2) on ∑B. Thus it is consistent with assumptions to be made in 
deriving the total exciting force to expand the integral of (108) in a Taylor 
series. Integrating the leading terms of this expansion gives