tangential manner (as shown in figure 5.2) is fundamental to the theory of lifting surfaces. Another possibility that can be envisaged is shown in figure 5.4; this involves an infinite velocity around the trailing edge and a stagnation point on the upper (or possibly the lower) surface of the foil. In fact, the streamlines as drawn in figure 5.4 correspond to a potential flow without circulation, whereas the expected situation shown in figure 5.2 Figure 5.2 Assumed flow past foil.

Chapter 5
is obtained from that in figure 5.4 by adding a positive counterclockwise 
circulation around the foil, sufficient to move the stagnation point back to 
the trailing edge. This may seem to contradict Kelvin’s theorem that the 
circulation is constant about any material contour always containing the 
same fluid particles, since this constant must equal zero if the fluid motion 
started from a state of rest.
This apparent contradiction can be resolved by noting that a material 
contour surrounding the foil cannot be related to another that is initially 
upstream, since the foil will “pierce” the fluid on the upstream contour. 
The contour that is initially upstream can only be related to a subsequent 
contour that surrounds the foil and a portion of its wake, as shown in figure 
5.5, and the circulation about this contour will indeed remain zero. A more 
illuminating contour is one sufficiently large to surround the foil initially 
and at all subsequent times, as shown in figure 5.6. Here the circulation 
must be zero, and the circulation about the foil must, therefore, be canceled 
by an equal and opposite starting vortex shed from the trailing edge into the 
wake during the initial acceleration. The shedding of this starting vortex 
can be observed by accelerating a flat plate in a kitchen sink. If the plate is 
Figure 5.3
Separated flow due to a bluff body (left) or excessive angle of attack (right).
Figure 5.4
Flow past foil without circulation.

Lifting Surfaces 

at right angles to the flow, vortices will be shed from both edges, but if it is 
at a small angle to the flow, only the trailing edge will shed a vortex.
If our interest is in the steady-state hydrofoil problem, the starting vor­
tex can be disregarded, since it will be situated infinitely far downstream 
and, in reality, will be dissipated by viscous diffusion. Thus, for the twodimensional steady-state problem, it is reasonable to expect irrotational 
flow throughout the surrounding fluid, but with a net circulation about 
the foil. This circulation is essential to the development of a lift force since 
Figure 5.5
The material contour shown here is initially upstream of the foil, at time t = t1. A 
short time later (t = t2), it has surrounded the foil and a portion of the wake (- - - - -). 
From Kelvin’s theorem, and the initial conditions upstream, the circulation around 
this contour is zero for all times.
Figure 5.6
The material contour shown here is sufficiently large to surround the foil at its origi­
nal position of rest, and subsequently after acceleration to a steady velocity U. The 
circulation about this contour is zero, so that the foil must shed a starting vortex of 
strength Γ, equal and opposite to the circulation of the foil.