when the body has the y-axis as a symmetry axis. The height of the body in the oscillation direction 3 is 2- D and the cross-sectional area of the body is 2: A. The added mass-value A337 will be twice the values obtained from Fig. 3.8. For semi-submersibles we will later calculate the response for wavelengths that are large compared to the cross-sectional dimensions of the structural parts. This implies small potential-flow damping coefficients and frequency-independent (w—>0) added mass coefficients

LINEAR WAVE-INDUCED MOTIONS

2.250

0.750

0.000

Tt T0.500 0.625 0.750 0.875 1.000

Fig. 3.8. Two-dimensional added mass in heave A3;°” for Lewis form
sections when the frequency of oscillation w— ~~. Infinite water
depth (A = cross-sectional area, B = Beam, D = Draught, @ =
velocity potential). The results can be applied to heave added mass
for the ‘double-body’ with height 2 - D and area 2- A. The added
mass will be twice the values in the figure.

Fig. 3.9. Strip theory for semi-submersibles.

RESPONSE IN REGULAR WAVES 53

(but excluding the use of heave added mass of two-dimensional surface
piercing bodies, which diverge).

A semi-submersible consists very often of long cylindrical parts. To
calculate the effect of the cylindrical parts on the added mass, strip
theory may be used. This is illustrated in Fig. 3.9. In strip theory it is
necessary to know the two-dimensional added mass coefficients. The
discussion of Fig. 3.8 should be remembered. In addition we may note
that for an ellipse oscillating in sway (see Fig. 3.10), the two-dimensional
added mass coefficients in sway, A2,% is equal to pza?. A special case

5 10 b/a

Fig. 3.10. Two-dimensional added mass coefficients in sway for an ellipse and
rectangular cross-sections in infinite fluid.

54 LINEAR WAVE-INDUCED MOTIONS

of this is a circle, where the added mass is equal to the displaced mass of
the fluid. Another special case is a flat plate, where we note that the
.added mass is infinite relative to the displaced mass. If the body is long
in the oscillation direction, the added mass is much smaller than the
displaced mass. We have also shown results for rectangular sections in
Fig. 3.10.

The added mass value will be influenced when a cylinder comes close
to the free-surface, a wall or another body. In Fig. 3.11 results are
shown for a horizontal circular cylinder when w— 0 (which is the same
as long wavelengths). The plane z=0 can either be understood as an
idealization of the free-surface or as a wall. The distance from the top of
the cylinder is called H and the added mass in heave and sway is shown
as a function of H/R where R is the radius of the cylinder. We note that
the closer the cylinder is to the plane z=0, the greater is the added
mass. When the cylinder touches the plane z=0 the added mass is
(x?/3—1) or 2.29 times the added mass for large values of H/R.
Further, we note that the cylinder has to be quite close to z = 0 before
there is any influence. For instance, when H/R = 1.0 there is only 20%
increase in the added mass compared to the value for large values of
H/R. Analytical solutions for this problem have been reviewed by
Greenhow & Li (1987). :

ass y

H/R

tj an oe
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70

Fig. 3.11. Added mass in sway and heave for a circular section close to a wall.

RESPONSE IN REGULAR WAVES 55

Forward speed effects

A current or the forward speed of a Structure will influence the added
mass and damping coefficients. An important effect for a ship at forward
speed is the effect of the frequency of an encounter, We will explain this
by an idealistic situation that can be created in a ship model basin. In one
end of the tank there is a wave maker that creates sinusoidal waves of
period T>. On the towing carriage we have mounted the vessel. The
carriage is heading into the waves with a constant speed U. The phase
speed of the waves (i.e. the propagation speed of the wave profile) is
¢ =g/d . Let us concentrate on one point P on the vessel and consider
the time 7, it takes for two successive wave crests to pass the point P.
This will obviously be less than 7). From Fig. 3.12 we can deduce

UT.+¢cT.=h

where A = 21g/w ”. This means that the circular frequency of encounter
w, = 2/T,. between the ship and the waves can be written as

We = Wy + WU /g (3.28)

For a general heading angle 6 between the vessel and the wave
propagation direction we can write

U cos B (3.29)

Wo
WM. = Wot

Here 6 = 0° is head seas, B = 90° is beam seas and B = 180° is following
seas. We note that w, = wo for beam seas and that @, is smaller than wo
for following seas. The frequency of encounter can actually be zero
which means the ship stays with the wave profile. For following seas
(B = 180°) this occurs when T) = 22U/g. According to equation (3.29)
w, can be negative. If this occurs we will interpret w, as the absolute
value of the right hand side of equation (3.29). Because the ship will

Fig. 3.12. A ship in regular head sea waves with an explanation of the
frequency of encounter effect. (U = forward speed of the ship,
T. = encounter period between the ship and the waves, c = phase
speed of the waves, 4 = wavelength).