PLAN Body plan of tanker model Fig. 6.12. Body plan of tanker model described in Table 6.2. F.P. = forward perpendicular. A.P. = aft perpendicular. The numbering of sections on the bottom part follows a standard numbering of ship crosssections; it starts with section | on the aft part of the ship and ends with section 20 on the forward part of the ship. The figure shows only half of a cross-section. The other part is symmetric about the centre-line.

192 CURRENT AND WIND LOADS

coefficient can partly be given by means of Fig. 6.14. The shed vorticity
is represented by one single vortex of strength I, which is a function of
time. To account for the free-surface effect one has to introduce an image
vortex. This ensures zero normal velocity on the free-surface. If the
splitter plate (free-surface) had not been there, instabilities would cause a
Karman vortex street to develop behind the double body. The image
vortex illustrated in Fig. 6.14 has a stronger effect on the motion of the

Px
+0.05
7 LOADED
4 BALLASTED
_|— \

Cora Coo

Lt
-oos +11} LH am
L

t

EXPERIMENTS \\

—-—-- CALCULATIONS

-0.10 5 *
o° 90° 180°
DRIFT ANGLE B

Fig. 6.13. Current yaw moment J*,° on the ship presented in Table 6.2 and
Fig. 6.12. Notation defined in Fig. 6.11. Positive yaw moment
implies rotation of the ship towards smaller B-angles. Moment is
with respect to vertical axis through the centre of gravity of the ship.
(Faltinsen et al., 1979.)

“yr

Fig. 6.14. Simple vortex system with an image flow above the free-surface so
that the rigid free-surface condition is satisfied.

CURRENT LOADS ON SHIPS 193

real vortex than the vortices in a Karman vortex street.behind the double
body have on each other. Since there is a connection between the
velocities of the shed vortices and the force on the body we can
understand why the free-surface influences the drag coefficient. In the
case of oscillating flow at low amplitudes, which has relevance for
eddy-making slow-drift damping, the eddies will stay symmetric for the
double body without a splitter plate. This means the free-surface has
little effect in this case.

Beam-—draught ratio effects
Experimental results by Tanaka et al. (1982) show little effect of the.
height-length ratio on the drag coefficient for two-dimensional crosssections of rectangular forms. One exception was for small height—length
ratios. If one translates the results to midship cross-sections, it implies
that the beam—draught B/D has small influence on the drag coefficient
when B/D > 0.8.

Bilge radius effects
Experimental results by Tanaka ez al. (1982) show a strong effect of the
bilge radius r on the drag coefficient. Increasing the bilge radius means
decreasing the drag coefficient. What we mean by strong effects can be
seen by writing Cp = C,e7"""? + C2, where C, and C; are constants of
similar magnitude and D is the draught. As an example k may be 6.

Effect of laminar or turbulent flow
The classical results for a circular cylinder show that there_is_a critical
Reynolds number, Below the critical Reynolds number the boundary
layer is laminar. In the supercritical and transcritical range the boundary
layer is turbulent. The consequence of this is quite different separation in
the stibcritical and transcritical Reynolds number ranges. A further

consequence is a difference in drag coefficient. For a smooth cylinder the
critical Reynolds number is at 2 ° 10°. By increasing the roughness of the
cylinder surface, the critical Reynolds number will decrease. For marine
structures one often has the situation that model tests have to be
performed in the subcritical range, while the full-scale situation is in the
transcritical range. However, when the separation occurs from sharp
corners one would expect less severe scale effects.

Aarsnes (1984) (see also Aarsnes et al. 1985) has shown that the drag
coefficient may be substantially different depending on laminar or
turbulent separation. This is also evident from Delany & Sorensen’s
(1953) results. Aarsnes’ results were for ship cross-sectional forms. The
ship body plan is shown in Fig. 6.15. The results are presented in Fig.
6.16, both for subcritical and transcritical flow. Estimates for the drag
coefficients for other cross-sections along the ship in subcritical flow are