be fitted fins or foils as in Fig. 1.2. SES (surface effect ship) is an air-cushion supported high-speed vehicle where the air-cushion is enclosed on the sides by rigid sidewalls.and on the bow and stern by compliant seals. By high speed we mean high Froude number (Fn). This is defined as Fn = U/(Lg)(U = ship speed, L = ship length, g = acceleration of gravity). A ship is considered a high-speed marine vehicle when Fn > ~0.5. From a

2 INTRODUCTION

DEFINITIONS OF MOTIONS 3

hydrodynamical view point one can distinguish between ships at zero,
normal and high speed. SWATH concepts have been designed for both
normal and high-speed applications.

Most of the applications presented in the main text will deal with ships
at zero or normal speed and with offshore structures. Applications to
high-speed marine vehicles will be given by exercises. We will discuss
both wave-induced loads and motions, with motions being the result of
integrated hydrodynamic loads on the structure. In the introduction we
will give a survey of important wave load and seakeeping problems for
ships and offshore structures. Before doing that we need to define the
motions.

DEFINITIONS OF MOTIONS
Motions of floating structures can be divided into. wave-frequency
motion, high-frequency motion, slow-drift motion and mean drift. The
oscillatory rigid-body translatory motions are referred to as surge, sway
and heave, with heave being the vertical motion (see Fig. 1.3). The
oscillatory angular motions are referred to as roll, pitch and yaw, with

Fig. 1.1. Five types of offshore structures. From left to right we have, jacket, yaw being rotation about a vertical axis. For a ship, surge is the
gravity platform, semi-submersible, floating production ship, longitudinal motion and roll is the angular motion about the longitudinal
. tension leg platform (TLP). (Partly based on a figure provided by axis.

Veritec A/S.) The wave-frequency -motion is mainly linearly-excited motion in the

wave-frequency range of significant wave energy. High-frequency mo-

j]
Ld A

LNG CARRIER

Si dewall

x [A
Cushion Bow seal
beam

Lift fan
Stern seal Rudder or Wet deck
ventral fin
SES
Fig. 1.2. Three types of ships. SWATH (small-waterplane area, twin-hull Fig. 1.3. Definition of rigid-body motion modes. Exemplified for a deep

ship), LNG (liquid natural gas) carrier, SES (surface effect ship). concrete floater.

TRADITIONAL SHIP PROBLEMS

tion is significant for TLPs and is often referred to as ‘rinr
‘springing’ and is due to resonance oscillations in heave, pitch an.

the platform. The restoring forces for the TLP are due to tethers ana
mass forces due to the platform. The natural periods of these motion
modes are typically 2-4 which are less than most wave periods. They
are excited by non-linear wave effects. ‘Ringing’ is associated with
transient effects and ‘springing’ is steady-state oscillations.

Similar non-linear effects cause slow drift and mean motions in waves
and current. Wind will also induce slow drift and mean motion. Slow
drift motion arises from resonance oscillations. For a moored structure it
occurs in surge, sway and yaw. The restoring forces are due to the
mooring system and the mass forces due to the structure. Typical
resonance periods are of the order of 1 to 2 minutes for conventionally
moored systems. ;

Heave is an important response variable for many structures. Table
1.1 illustrates the range of the natural heave periods of different types of
marine structures. These include SES, TLPs, monohull ships, catamarans, SWATH ships and semi-submersibles. The table indicates how the
natural heave oscillations can be excited. For instance for the SES-hull it
occurs due to high encounter frequency between the ship and the waves,
while for the SWATH it occurs due to low encounter frequency between
the ship and the waves. The table also shows what types of restoring
forces can cause heave resonance. For the SES it is the compressibility
effect of the air in the cushion. For the monohull ship, catamaran,
SWATH and semi-submersible it is due to change in buoyancy forces.
This is related directly to the waterplane area of the vessels. Finally we
see in Table 1.1 either the most important physical source of natural
heave damping or how one artificially increases the damping by control
systems. .

For the SES it is the heave accelerations and not the heave motions
that are important. If no ‘ride control’ is used, acceleration values of 1.5g
can occur in relatively calm sea. If the natural heave period is 0.5 s, it
means the heave amplitude is ~0.1 m.

A semi-submersible is designed to avoid resonance heave motion and
the maximum heave motion in severe sea states will be less than half the
maximum wave amplitude.

to low encounter
frequency between
ship and waves

hull ship)

>20s
Linear wave forces due

waterplane area twin
Waterplane area

SWATH (small

Foil control

Semi-submersible
Swell (long waves)

>20s
Waterplane area

Viscous effects

Monohul! ship
Catamaran

4-16 s*
Waterplane area
Linear wave forces
Wave radiation

frequency wave

forces

TLP (tension leg
platform)
Elasticity of tethers
Non-linear sum
Viscous effects

2-45

frequency between
ship and waves

‘Ride Control’

due to high
encounter

ship)

<is
Air compressibility

SES (surface effect
Linear wave forces

TRADITIONAL SHIP PROBLEMS
Examples of important seakeeping and wave load problems for ships are
illustrated in Fig. 1.4. In particular, vertical accelerations and relative
vertical motions between the ship and the waves are important responses.
Accelerations determine loads on cargo and equipment and are an
important reason for seasickness. The relative vertical motions can be
used to evaluate the possibility and damage due to slamming and water

mechanism around the

natural heave period:
Rough estimate: V(L/1.5), where L is ship length in metres.

Restoring force:
Dominating excitation
Important damping:

Table 1.1. Resonant heave oscillations of ships, offshore structures and high speed vehicles
Vessel:

Natural heave period: