S 36 * Winter ( Nov—Jan ) 3 2eoe 9 Summer ( Jun— Aug ) 2 - Bud 2 020 "a ges dgamtnonoc BES 8 3 & age ‘A < ann E 1S) 0-10 y Reference Height 10 metres above sea level 0-05 1 2 3.4 5 678910 20 30 40 5060 Wind Speed (ms~1) : Fig. 2.8. Cumulative distribution function for the one hour mean wind speed : at 10 m above MSL representative for the northern North Sea.

34 SEA ENVIRONMENT

where U, is the tidal component,
U,, is the component generated by local wind,
U, is the component generated by Stokes drift (see equation (2.21)
valid for regular waves)
U,, is the component from major ocean circulation, if any,
depending on geographical location (Gulf Stream etc.),
Userup is the component due to set-up phenomena and storm
surges,
U a is the local density-driven current governed by strong density
jumps in the upper ocean.
The depth dependence of the tidal component U,(z) and the local wind
component U,,(z) are given as

U,(0), for —(h - 10)<z <0

U(2) = 9
U,(0) logio( 1 +), for —h<2<—(h — 10)
i0-h
(ho + 2)
Uygy=| COG, for ~hy <2 <0

0, for z<—hy

‘ where h is water depth. Distances are in metres and hy can be chosen as
50m. As a first approximation one may set

U,(0) = 0.02U 19

where Ug is the wind velocity measured 10 m above sea level. However,

the Stokes drift is included in this formula. This can be significant (see

equation (2.21)) and should not be included if the current velocity is

wanted at a fixed point in space. The tidal velocity component depends

on the location. In open sea it may be up to ~0.5ms7!. A total current

velocity typical for design of offshore structures in the North Sea is
ms”.

EXERCISES

2.1 Resonant fluid motion in a rectangular tank
Consider a rectangular tank partly filled with water. The water depth is
constant and equal to Ah. The tank breadth is 2b. Assume twodimensional fluid motion in a (y,2) plane and that the tank is not
moving.
(a) Show that the velocity potential

or = Acosh(k(z + h)) cos ky cos wt (2.41)

satisfies the Laplace equation and the boundary condition on
the bottom of the tank.

EXERCISES 35

(b) Which values of e are possible for the velocity potential to
satisfy the boundary conditions on the side walls of the tank?

(c) Show from the free-surface condition that the only periods
when fluid motion is possible (i.e. natural periods) are given
by

Ay\}
Ty= 2x [(& ann(™*)) n=1,2,3)--. (2.42)

Derive an approximate formula when h/b— 0.
‘(d) Describe the fluid motion at the free-surface as a function of
time.

2.2 Propagating water waves
Consider a velocity potential
1\}
o=Ae* (-) cos(wt — kr) (2.43)
where r =(y? +2)! and A is a constant. Assume deep water and a free
surface of infinite horizontal extent.
(a) Is the Laplace equation satisfied everywhere in the fluid?
(b) In what directions are the waves described by equation (2.43)
propagating?
(c) How is the wave amplitude varying in space?

2.3 Wave kinematics in regular waves
Consider a model basin with a wave maker in one end that generates
long-crested regular waves with circular frequency w. In the following
calculation you can assume a wave period of 2s and a wave amplitude of
0.25 m. The tank length is 100 m.

(a) Approximately how long will it take for a wave front to
propagate from the wave maker to the other end of the tank?
Assume the water depth is infinite.

(b) Consider a small cork that is floating on the water and is not
disturbing the wave field. Approximately how long will it take
for the cork to move from the wave maker to the other end of
the tank?

(c) What is the maximum fluid velocity in the tank?

(d) Consider an observer situated along the tank side and a time
after the wave front has passed by. How long does it take
between.two succeeding wave crests to pass the observer?
What is the phase of the wave elevation 1.5 m closer to the
wave maker relative to the wave elevation at the position of

the observer?