is a more representative value. op 2000-19-51 900 -10 700 -107 400 -t0F 5 0.2 210° 4 6 pet 2 4 6 8 10° 2 4 Fig. 6.3. Drag coefficient Cp of rough circular cylinders in steady incident flow for different surface roughness values k/D (k = average height of surface roughness, D = cylinder diameter, Rn = U..D/v, U.= incident flow velocity.) A, R/D = 110- 107°; O, k/D = 450: 107°; O, k/D = 900: 107°; (Achenbach, 1971).

Ba
pyar rim!

178 , CURRENT AND WIND LOADS

In the figure we note a very distinct drop in Cp-values in a pertain
Reynolds number range. This is referred to as the critical flow regime
and is particularly marked for flow around a smooth cylinder. It is
common practice to divide this dependence on Reynolds number into

t

}

different flow regimes. However, there are many different definitions in {

the literature. We will refer to the following four different flow regimes:
subcritical flow, critical flow, supercritical flow and transcritical flow.
For flow around a smooth circular cylinder the subcritical flow regime is
for Reynolds number less then ~2- 10°. The critical flow _regime is for
~2-10°<Rn<~5- 10°. The supercritical flow regime is for ~5 - 10°<
Rn<~3- 10° and the transcritical flow is for Reynolds numbers larger
than 3- 10°. In the subcritical flow the boundary layer is always laminar,
while in supercritical and transcritical flow the boundary layer is
turbulent upstream of the separation point.

BOUNDARY LAYERS
We will give a short description of boundary layer flow and flow
separation.

According to the inviscid theory for an ideal fluid we can write the
tangential velocity around the cylinder surface in the form of equation
(6.1). For @-values between —s/4 and a/4 and for all Reynolds
numbers of practical interest this is a good approximation at a small
distance from the cylinder surface. However, it cannot be valid in the
immediate vicinity of the body surface. The physical tangential velocity
has to be zero on the cylinder surface. This means there is 4 boundary
layer along the cylinder surface. Viscous forces are important in this part
of the fluid. Let us study the boundary layer in more detail and assume
the boundary layer to be laminar, i.e. ‘well organized’. As an exercise we
will first say that the flow does not separate. That means we will assume
equation (6.1) to be valid outside the boundary layer. If we now solve the
boundary layer equations (see for instance Schlichting, 1979) we will find
a tangential velocity distribution within the boundary layer as shown in
Fig. 6.4. This figure gives information on how thick the boundary layer
is. However, there are different definitions of boundary layer thickness.
One definition is. the normal distance from the wall to the point where
the tangential velocity is 99% of the local free stream velocity. If potential
flow theory is valid, the local free stream velocity is given by equation
(6.1). From Fig. 6.4 we see that for 6 = 80° the tangential velocity is 99%
of the potential flow velocity when

» (Usk)
R\ v

Here y is a coordinate normal to the body surface with y = 0 at the body.

(6.7)

BOUNDARY LAYERS 179

For Rn = 10° this means that the boundary layer thickness is about 1% of
the radius.

From the tangential velocity distribution in the boundary layer we can
determine where the flow separates. Flow separation means that the flow
breaks strongly away from the body. It occurs at a point S on the
cylinder surface where there is backflow in the boundary layer on the
downstream side of S and no backflow on the upstream side of S. This
means

ou _ (6.8)
ay
on the body surface at the separation point. If laminar boundary layer
flow is assumed and the velocity distribution given by equation (6.1) is
valid outside the boundary layer, it follows that the flow around a
circular cylinder will separate at angles approximately equal to +110°
(Schlichting, 1979). However, this is not what happens in reality for

8=80°

0.5 1.0 u/U,{9)

Fig. 6.4. Example of tangential velocity distribution u inside a steady laminar
boundary layer flow around a circular cylinder. The results are for
one angular position @ and are presented as a function of the
y-coordinate normal to the body surface (y = 0 is at the. body
surface). U,(@) = tangential potential flow velocity just outside the
boundary layer at the same angular position 0.