A; 2g? B33= (=) ard 3.26) 33 =P inal o? ( This expression is valid for any frequency. It shows that the damping coefficient can never be negative. Similar results hold for B,, i = 2 and 4. We do not have a similar guarantee for the added mass coefficient, which actually can be negative for certain body shapes and frequencies. Examples have been documented for catamarans, bulb sections and submerged sections close to the free-surface. Fig. 3.5 illustrates an

48 LINEAR WAVE-INDUCED MOTIONS

example for sway added mass of a two-dimensional catamaran section
that consists of two circular cylinders with axes in the mean free-surface
and radius R. The distance between the two axes is 2p. Large negative
added mass values occur in Fig. 3.5 for frequencies close to the lowest
natural frequency w,, for antisymmetric sloshing modes between the two
hulls. With sloshing we mean resonant liquid oscillations between the

°

x WITHOUT
INTERACTION

Fig. 3.5. Two-dimensional added mass in sway A,,°” for catamaran sections.
The cross-sectional form of each hull is circular with the axis in the
mean free-surface. Infinite water-depth. (2p = the distance between
the cylinder axes, R = Cylinder radius, w = circular frequency of
oscillation.)

RESPONSE IN REGULAR WAVES 49

two hulls. We can estimate w,, by assuming that resonance occurs when
there is half a wavelength between the inner sides of the two hulls, i.e.
we can write

j j
o,(5) = 3 (3.27)
=

The damping of sloshing oscillations is low since the resulting standing
wave carries no energy away. This means that the wave elevations
become large at the inner sides of the hulls for frequencies close to ,. A
characteristic feature of resonant systems with low damping is that the
phase angle of the response changes rapidly by 180° by varying the
excitation frequency through the resonance frequency. This means that
the wave amplitude at the inner side of a hull can change from being in
phase with the sway acceleration to being 180° out of phase. When
resonance occurs and large wave motion is present between the two
hulls, the hydrodynamic pressure on the inner side of the hull is closely
i in phase and approximately proportional to the wave elevation in the
Kale vicinity. The hydrodynamic pressure on the outer side of the hulls is
i small in comparison. By remembering that added mass in sway has to do
with horizontal hydrodynamic pressure forces caused by forced sway
oscillation, we can understand that both very large positive and negative
added mass values occur in Fig. 3.5 in the vicinity of w,(R/g)? (see
equation (3.27)).

Parameter dependence of added mass and damping

The added mass and damping coefficients may show a strong frequency
dependence. As another example, of this we may note that the added
mass in heave for a surface-pierciiig' fwo-dimensional body in deep water
» , — goes logarithmically to infinity when w — 0.

44 i.” The added mass and damping coefficients depend on the motion
é mode. That means that added mass in heave for a body is not necessarily
p the same as added mass in sway. For instance, for the circular cylinder in
a Fig. 3.3 it can be shown that the added mass in sway is equal to
f p(x/2)R* when w—>0 while it goes logarithmically to infinity for heave
when w—>0. Fig. 3.6 illustrates the frequency dependency of the added
mass and damping in heave and sway for a circular cylinder with an axis
in the mean free-surface. The results are based on numerical calculations. We should note that B3°*”/(@wA) approaches the finite value 8/z
when w—> 0. This implies that the damping coefficient goes to zero when
w—>0. As pointed out earlier this is what is expected from physical
& arguments.

F The added moment in roll for the same cylinder depends on the choice
i of roll axis. If we select the roll axis to go through (0,0), there is no