in the plane of the wave propagation direction, there exist different possibilities for formulations. Let us illustrate this using a submerged horizontal circular cylinder in waves where the wave propagation direction is orthogonal to the cylinder axis. A straightforward generalization of Morison’s equation would be to write the horizontal and vertical force on a strip of length dy as dF, = pw Cua, + £CpD dy u(u? + w)S (7.3) dF; = pw Cua +£cpD dy w(u2 + w)! (7.4)

226 VISCOUS WAVE LOADS AND DAMPING

Here w and az are vertical undisturbed fluid velocity and acceleration
components at the midpoint of the strip. Chaplin (1988) has shown that
improved correlation with experiments can be obtained if different Cy
and Cp coefficients are assigned to the horizontal and_ vertical
components.

When waves and currents are acting simultaneously, the combined
effect should be considered. The normal approach is to add vectorially
the wave-induced velocity and the current velocity in the velocity term of
the Morison’s equation. As mentioned in the beginning of the chapter,
one should be aware that Cy- and Cp-values are also influenced by the
presence of a current.

The design wave approach is often used in combination with
Morison’s equation. This means one analyses the load effect of a regular
wave system. Often non-linear wave theories are used. A short termstatistical approach may also be applied (Vinje, 1980). However, more
has to be learned about Cy- and Cp-values in this context. For instance,
is it right to use just one Cy- and one Cp-value to represent a sea state?
If so, is it then sufficient to use a characteristic Keulegan—Carpenter
number, Reynolds number, roughness ratio etc. to estimate the Cy- and
Cp-value? The answer is probably yes if the characteristic KC-number
is large and the flow is not in a critical flow regime. What we mean by a
large characteristic KC-number has to be precisely defined. In the case
of extreme wave loads on a strip of a vertical circular cylinder close to the
free surface #H,,,/D is a characteristic KC-number, where Hmnax is the
most probable largest wave height. If 7H,.,/D > ~40 we could consider
the KC-number to be large. A typical Cp-value for a smooth surface is
then 0.7. It is of course easy to criticize Morison’s equation. However,
there is nothing better from a practical point of view. The reason for this
is the very complicated flow picture that occurs for separated flow around
marine structures.

Many attempts have been made to solve separated flow around marine
structures numerically. Examples of methods used are

(a) Single vortex method (Brown & Michael, 1955; Faltinsen &
Sortland, 1987)

(b) Vortex sheet model (Faltinsen & Pettersen, 1987)

(c) Discrete vortex method (Sarpkaya & Shoaff, 1979)

(d) Combination of Chorin’s method and vortex-in-cell method
(Chorin, 1973; Smith & Stansby, 1988)

(e) Navier—Stokes solvers (Lecointe & Piquet, 1985) —

A general description of the state of the art is that the methods are
generally limited to two-dimensional flow, that the methods have
documented satisfactory agreement in some cases, but that they are
presently not robust enough to be applied with confidence in completely
new problems, where there is no guidance from experiments. Due to

MORISON’S EQUATION 227

lack of proper turbulence modelling of wakes it is difficult to simulate the
flow around a cylinder in the near-wake of another cylinder. Except for
the single vortex method, the methods are often time consuming to apply
to practical problems. One can end up spending a lot of computer time
with numerical prediction methods for separated flow around offshore
structures without gaining further knowledge. The single vortex method
is limited to small KC-flow around bodies with sharp corners. The other
methods have more general applicability.

An example of the simulated wake picture by the vortex sheet model of
Faltinsen & Pettersen (1987) is presented in Fig. 7.1. The figure shows

Fig. 7.1. Free shear layer positions at different times for oscillatory crossflow
past a flat plate. KC = UmT/H = a (Uy = velocity amplitude of the
ambient flow, T = oscillation period, H = half the height of the
plate). Uyt/H = 0.784, 1.584, 1.984, 2.384, 3.184, 3.984, 4.784,
5.584, 6.384, 6.984 (Faltinsen & Pettersen, 1987.)