physical ‘sloshing’ motion. In the sloshing case the body boundary condition would be Og/dn = 0. However, to get an idea what the irregular frequencies might be we should have the sloshing modes in mind. For a submerged body no irregular frequencies exist. What is happening mathematically at an irregular frequency is that the determinant of the coefficient matrix in the linear equation system for the unknown source densities goes to zero when the number of unknowns goes to infinity.

NUMERICAL METHODS

Lee & Sclavounos (1989) have presented a practical way to
avoid the problem of irregular frequencies. If no attempts are
made to get rid of the irregular frequencies, they may be
difficult to detect if few frequencies are used in the
calculations. Even if many frequencies are used, the irregular
frequencies may be difficult to detect in special cases. An
example of this is calculation of added mass and damping for
a catamaran. In this case the strong physical interaction
effects between the hulls can be mixed up with irregular
frequency behaviour.

. Panelling of the hull surface

The panelling of the hull surface is often done by plane
quadrilateral elements in three-dimensional problems. Details
of how to create plane quadrilateral elements mathematically
have been presented by Hess & Smith (1962). Dependent on
the body shape the panels may create ‘leaks’ through the body
surface. The reason is that the panels do not fit together. This
may disturb a practical maritime person, but has no serious
consequences for the physical description of the fluid. The
condition of no flow through the hull surface is satisfied at the
geometrical area centre of each panel and nothing is required
about the fluid behaviour at the edges of elements where
geometrical ‘leaks’ between the elements may appear.

There is no unique way to approximate the hull surface by
elements. However, one should keep in mind that one
assumes the source density and the fluid pressure to be
constant over each element. Therefore one should keep
smaller elements in areas where the flow changes more
rapidly. An example of the latter is in the vicinity of sharp
corners. It should be realized that the numerical solution for
velocities never is satisfactory on the element closest to a
sharp corner. The reason is that the potential flow solution
has a singularity there, and that this is inconsistent with
assuming the source density and velocity potential to be
constant over an element. In reality the flow will separate at a
sharp corner. This effect is not included in the method. In the
wave zone the element size should be small compared to the
wavelength. A characteristic length of an element ought to be
at most 4 of the wavelength. Around a vertical column with a
circular cross-section there ought to be 15-20 circumferential
elements at any height. If there is a conflict between these two
recommendations, the more conservative is required.

The body boundary condition is often satisfied on the
geometrical mid-point. The elements must not be selected so

SOURCE TECHNIQUE 117

that any element mid-points are very close to the edges of
another element. The reason is that induced velocities from
an element are singular at its edges (see similar discussion of
induced velocity from a source element in two-dimensional
flow). Problems like this may happen for very thin bodies or
for small gap problems.

Typical values for the total number of elements may vary
from 500 to 1500. However, Fig. 4.1 shows an example
where 12 608 panels were used. This requires iterative
solutions of the linear equation systems for the source
densities in order to be within practical limits of CPU time on
available computer hardware. The best way to find a sufficient
number of elements, is to do calculations with increasing
numbers of elements and-check convergence of the results.

The solution procedure that we have set up can be generalized to any
modes of motion, i.e. to surge, sway, roll, pitch and yaw motion (see for
instance Faltinsen & Michelsen, 1974). This means we can find the
added mass and damping matrix. We may also solve the diffraction
problem by using the body boundary condition d¢/dn = —(ap'/dn)
where @! is incident wave: potential. This enables us to find the wave
excitation loads, i.e. wave excitation forces in surge, sway and heave as
well as wave excitation moments in roll, pitch and yaw. We can then set
up the equation system for solving motions in six degrees of freedom (see
equation (3.47)). When the motions are found, we may calculate flow
details by using the expression for the velocity potential in terms of a
three-dimensional source distribution. The free-surface elevation can be
evaluated by using the free-surface condition

a
e+e wo? (4.31

By Bernoulli’s equation it follows that the dynamic pressure is
p=—p dp/at at the mean position of the body. When we calculate the
dynamic pressure at the hull for one particular time instant, we should
include the hydrostatic pressure —pgz and take into account that 2 is
changed due to the vertical rigid body motion of the hull. Note,
however, that it is consistent with linear theory to evaluate Op/9r at the
mean position in the calculation of the pressure. Care should be shown in
evaluating velocities close to the body. One reason is that the velocities
are singular at the edges of the element. Experience has shown that one
has to be of the order of a characteristic element length outside the body
in order to always obtain satisfactory estimations of fluid velocities.
Further, the velocity potential should not be evaluated at places on the
element other than at the geometrical area centre.