non-shadow part of the waterplane curve (see Fig. 5.8). The. formula i is not restricted to a ship and may for instance be_used in connection. with. towing of marine structures_in waves. Equati 6. 22) is sensitive to the geometric form in the bow region. This is illustrated in Fig. 5.10 for a ship, where Fy means a reference value for the added resistance. To illustrate the effect of forward speed, we see that equation (5.22) Fig. 5.9. Definition of parameters.

146 SECOND-ORDER NON-LINEAR PROBLEMS

shows that

Added resistance (Fn #0) _ 2 ,U
Added resistance (Fn =0) _ g

If we set A/L =0.5, the ratio becomes 1+7- Fn, which means a strong
forward speed dependence. The formula also indicates that the effect of
current cannot be neglected. This was confirmed by Zhao et al. (1988);
who pointed out that current velocities of 1ms~' may very well
represent a 50% increase in drift forces on large volume structures. This
was based on both numerical and experimental investigations. Qualitatively-one can understand that current must have an effect on mean wave
forces if one considers that drift forces are due to a structure’s ability to
cause waves and the fact that current has an influence on the wave field
(see Fig. 4.13).

A typical curve for the added resistance Raw of a ship at a moderate
Froude number in head sea regular waves is presented in Fig. 5.1).
There are two main features in the figure.

(a) For small wavelengths (A/L < 0.5) the added resistance is
mainly due to reflection of waves from the bow of the ship.
This effect is described by equation (5.22).

(6) For large wavelengths the added resistance has a maximum
when A is of the order of the ship length. This maximum
occurs when the relative vertical motion between the ship and
the waves is large. For moderate Froude numbers below 0.3
the maximum value of Oaw = Raw/(pgt,”B’/L) is normally
below 20. For a high speed hull form at Fn = 0.8 StromTejsen et al. (1973) reported values of aw close to 35.

Gerritsma & Beukelman (1972) have derived a widely-used f formula for

Fig. 5.10. Influence of bow form on added resistance for small wave lengths.
(F = reference value for added resistance.) Head sea waves.

MEAN WAVE (DRIFT) FORCES AND MOMENTS 147

strip-theory approximation and shows that

k
Raw= 5 [ (Bx? + UL AN?)Vare de 5.23)
20. IL dx . .

The integration is along the length of the ship and V,,(x)-is the
amplitude of the. relative vertical velocity between the ship and the
waves. The formula demonstrates that added resistance depends strongly
on the relative vertical motion between the ship and the waves. The
quality of the predictions by the formula is sensitive to the accuracy of
the calculation of relative vertical velocity. The formula should be used
with care for unconventional ship forms and fishing vessels. It is also
questionable in the small wavelength range for blunt ship forms. One
reason is that the formula is based on slender -body (strip) theory and
neglects the effect of reflection of waves from the bow of the ship.

We can obtain a crude approximation for the added resistance of a ship
in the ‘ship- motion’ r: range by starting out with a formula proposed by
Faltinsen et al. (1980). This formula was derived by a direct pressure

integration approach and is valid for regular sinusoidal incident waves.

When the added resistance is at its maximum, a dominant contribution

in the formula is the relative motion term

t |
Due to bow !' ! Due to 1

wave reflection; shipmotions |
!

0.5 1.0 A/L

Fig. 5.11. Typical wavelength dependence of added resistance Raw of a ship at
moderate Froude number in regular head sea waves. (€, = wave
‘amplitude of incident waves, A = wavelength, L = ship length,
B =beam of the ship.)