finite, the third term in the brackets can be shown to be negligible compared with the last two terms. This means we have shown that the source potential represents outgoing waves far away from the source point. It is also possible to show that the free-surface condition (equation (4.20)) is satisfied. Fig. 4.4 shows a picture of the wave system caused by a source. It is possible to show from equation (4.25) that 14 |e when w—>0 (4.26) Ge7i#t_, late

pee ener

112 NUMERICAL METHODS
and
G —iwe l 1 —iwe
ees R-w when wo (4.27)

The latter means that the integral in (4.25) approaches —2/R’ when
wo,

Equation (4.26) expresses the source potential as a combination of a
source in infinite fluid and an image source above the free-surface when
w—>0. (To be precise 1/R is actually a sink with density 42 (see
equation (4.1)). However, we use the word ‘source’ for 1/R in this
context.) This confirms that the velocity potential satisfies the rigid wall
condition d¢/8z =0 on z =0 when the frequency of oscillation goes to
zero. This is illustrated in Fig. 4.5.

Equation (4.27) expresses the fact that the source potential is a
combination of a source in infinite fluid and an image sink above the
free-surface when w—>. This expression satisfies the free-surface
condition ¢ = 0 on z= 0. This is illustrated in Fig. 4.6. The solution of
the velocity potential for the forced heave problem can be written as a
distribution of sources over the mean wetted hull surface Sp as

P(X, 9, 2350 = Re { f dsQ(s)G(x, y, 23 E(s), n(s); ciye mt
» (4.28)

where the source function Ge7'” is given by equation (4.25) for the

“0
~20

Fig. 4.4. Picture of the wave field caused by a harmonically oscillating source
with zero mean speed.

SOURCE TECHNIQUE 113

iwe

infinite water depth problem. Ge~'” is also called Green function. The
source density Q(s) is complex with a real and an imaginary part and is
found by satisfying the body boundary condition. This is done by first
introducing a normalized source density O(s) so that

Q(sje'" = O(s)@ [3] e" (4.29)

The purpose of the normalization is, as before, to separate out the time
dependence and the unknown heave motion. The body boundary
condition leads to an integral equation for O(s) which in general we are
not able to solve analytically. What we do is to discretize the problem by
dividing the hull surface into elements, over which we assume the source
density is constant. Fig. 4.7 shows an example of how a ship hull surface

* IMAGE SOURCE
N

N

‘

a“
a“

a
x “SOURCE

Fig. 4.5. Illustration that a wave source satisfies the rigid wall condition on the
free-surface when the frequency of oscillation w— 0. The wave
source consists of a source in infinite fluid and an image source. The
field point is in the mean free-surface. The solid line that is in the
same direction as the dashed line from the source point shows the
velocity vector due to the source. The velocity vector due to the
image source is illustrated in a similar way. The vertical solid lines
are the vertical components of the velocity vectors.

* IMAGE SINK

XN
aN
DO
= 2
“7
Yo
«7 SOURCE

Fig. 4.6. Illustration that a wave source satisfies the zero potential condition
on the free-surface when the frequency of oscillation w — ©, The
wave source consists of a source in infinite fluid and an image sink.
The field point is in the mean free-surface. The solid line that is in
the same direction as the dashed line from the source point shows
the velocity vector due to the source. The velocity vector due to the
image sink is illustrated in a similar way. The horizontal and vertical
solid lines are respectively the horizontal and vertical components of
the velocity vectors. The total horizontal velocity is zero on the
free-surface, which means the velocity potential is a constant on the
free-surface. The constant is chosen to be zero.