systems, analysis of offshore loading systems, evaluation of towing of large gravity platforms from the fabrication site to the operation site, added resistance of ships in waves, performance of submarines close to the free-surface and analysis of slowly oscillating heave, pitch and roll of large-volume structures with low waterplane area. Sum frequency forces can excite resonant oscillations of TLPs in heave, pitch and roll. This is referred to as ‘springing’ in the literature and can contribute to fatigue of tethers.

132 SECOND-ORDER NON-LINEAR PROBLEMS

The order of magnitude of mean wave forces relative to linear
first-order wave forces can be exemplified by results presented by Zhao
ét al. (1988) for a hemisphere floating in the free-surface. Incident
regular waves with wave amplitude €, were studied in a limited
frequency range. By translating the results to a full-scale diameter of
50 m we find the linear wave excitation forces to be about 10*f, (KN)
while the horizontal drift force is about 10?€,? (kN). For a wave
amplitude of 1 m the linear wave excitation forces are 100 times larger,
and for a wave amplitude of 10m the first-order force is about 10 times
larger, than the mean wave forces. Since mean wave forces and moments
are small, a high degree of accuracy is needed both in the calculations
and i in the experiments. The results are sensitive to wave heading, ‘body
form,. body motion, wavelength and wave height. In irregular seas the
second-order loads are also sensitive to the width of the wave spectrum,
i.e. the wave frequency range with significant wave energy.

ability to cause waves. The consequence of this is that drift forces we

small in a potential flow model when mass forces dominate. This occurs
for semi-submersibles. However, viscous effects may also contribute to
drift forces. This is a third-order effect that will briefly be discussed later
in the chapter. Let us try to give a simple explanation of why we get a
mean wave force on a structure in regular incident harmonically
oscillating waves. For a surface piercing body a major contribution to the
horizontal mean wave force is due to the relative vertical motion between
the structure and the waves. This causes some of the body surface to be
part of the time in the water and part of the time out of the water.
Examining the pressure in one of the points in this surface zone, it is
obvious from Fig. 5.1 that the result is a non-zero mean pressure even in
regular harmonically oscillating waves. If the relative vertical motion
differs around the waterline, the result is a non-zero mean force. This
occurs for large-volume structures where the incident waves are modified
by the structure. However, there are also other contributions. We get
one of them by averaging the quadratic term in Bernoulli’s equation.

Pressure

Partly in
or out
of water Non-zero
=> mean force
—_—P il
Gut of the"?
water

Fig. 5.1. Horizontal mean wave force contribution due to pressure forces on
the free-surface zone of a structure.

SECOND-ORDER NON-LINEAR PROBLEMS 133

A simple way to illustrate the presence of non-linear wave effects is to
consider the quadratic velocity term in Bernoulli’s equation for the fluid
pressure. We can write this term as

-Evp+V2+V3)= —F iver (1)

where V=(V,, V2, V3) is the fluid velocity vector. We emphasize that
equation (5.1) provides only one of the non-linear effects. Other
contributions may be equally important.

Consider an idealized sea state consisting of two wave components of
circular frequencies w, and w2. An approximation for the x-component
of the velocity'can be written formally as

V, =A, cos(w,t + €;) + Az cos(@2t + €2) (5.2)

By algebra it now follows that

A,’
+—) cos(2@ t + 2€,)

_e 2= 2 (4r Ay
M1 27272

A 2

+ > cos(2w.2t + 2€)

+A,A; cos[(@; — @2)t + €; — €2)

+ A,A, cos[(@, + w2)t + €, + el] (5.3)

This means that we have the presence of a constant term represented by
—0.5p (A;?/2 + A,?/2) and a pressure term which oscillates with the
difference frequency @, — @2. For a more realistic representation of the
seaway, and considering the wave as the sum of N components of
different circular frequencies w,, we will find pressure terms with
difference frequencies w;— w,, (k,j =1,N). These non-linear interaction terms produce. slowly-varying. excitation forces and moments which
may cause resonance - oscillations in the surge, sway, and yaw motions of
a moored structure. Typical resonance periods are 1—2 minutes.

Equation (5.3) also tells us that non-linear effects can create excitation
forces with frequencies higher than the dominant frequency components
in a wave spectrum, This is due to terms oscillating with frequencies
2a, 2w, and (w,+@.). These may be important for exciting the
resonance oscillations in the heave, pitch and roll for TLPs. Typical
resonance periods are 2~4s. The restoring forces for the TLP are due to
the tethers and the mass forces due to the structure. In the following text
we will start by discussing mean wave loads.