the ship. I 3.8 Frequency of encounter spectrum Consider incident long-crested waves on a ship with forward speed U. The wave spectrum is given as S(w ). Assume the frequency of i encounter spectrum 53°(w,) of heave has been determined. (a) Explain why the frequency of encounter spectrum S°(,) of i the incident waves can be related to the wave spectrum by S*(We) |\dwe| = S(wo) |dwol | when there is a one-to-one relationship between w, and w 9. ;

4 NUMERICAL METHODS FOR
‘ LINEAR WAVE-INDUCED MOTIONS
AND LOADS

There exist practical numerical tools based on _ three-dimensional
analyses that predict linear wave-induced motions and loads on largevolume structures at zero Froude number. A wave spectrum is used to
describe a sea state and results in an irregular sea can be obtained by
linear superposition of results from regular incident waves. Panel
methods are the most common techniques used to analyse the linear
steady state response of large-volume structures in regular waves. An
example of panelling of a TLP is shown in Fig. 4.1, where a total of
12 608 panels is used for the whole structure. In general about 1000
elements would be sufficient. There exist different panel methods. One
way is to distribute sources (and sinks) over the mean wetted body
surface. Another way is to use a mixed distribution of both sources, sinks
and normal dipoles distributed over the mean wetted body surface. Panel
methods are also called boundary element methods.

Panel methods are based on potential theory. It is assumed that
oscillation amplitudes of the fluid and the body are small relative to
cross-sectional dimensions of the body. The effect of flow separation is
neglected. This means that the method should not be applied to jacket
type structures, risers or tethers. The method can only predict damping
due to radiation of surface waves. This means a panel method does not
satisfactorily predict rolling motion of a ship close to the roll resonance
period because the wave radiation damping moment due to roll may be
small and viscous damping effects due to flow separation are
important. Another case where panel methods fail to give physically
correct answers and viscous effects are important is in predicting vertical
forces on a TLP in extreme wave situations in a frequency region where
small excitation loads occur. This happens in general in a period range
between 15 and 20s. and is important in establishing design loads for the
tethers of a TLP. The reason for the small forces was discussed in
connection with equation (3.41). The vertical hydrodynamic forces at the
intersection between the pontoons and the columns counteract the
hydrodynamic forces on the pontoons. Since the hydrodynamic forces
due to potential flow effects become small other physical effects are
important. In this case viscous effects matter.

SOURCE TECHNIQUE , 103

SOURCE TECHNIQUE
We will discuss the source technique in detail and start by repeating what
a source is. A source is a point from which fluid is imagined to flow out
uniformly in all directions. If the total flux outwards across a small closed
surface surrounding the point is Q, then Q is called the ‘strength’ of the
source. A negative source is called a ‘sink’. We will from now on use the
word source both for sources and sinks.
The velocity potential at any point P, due to a three-dimensional point
source, in a liquid at rest at infinity, is

¢ = -Q/(4nR) 4.)

where R denotes the radial distance of P from the source point. This
gives a radial flow from the point and if ds is an element of a spherical
surface having its centre at the source, we have the velocity flux through
the spherical surface as

9¢ 4-12 _
[[$o-cS 4nR?=Q | ; (4.2)

In two dimensions the expression for the velocity potential due to a

Fig. 4.1. Submerged portion of one quadrant of a six-column TLP discretized
with 3152 panels per quadrant (12 608 panels for the total structure)
(Korsmeyer et al., 1988.)