1979). However, this is not what happens in reality for 8=80° 0.5 1.0 u/U,{9) Fig. 6.4. Example of tangential velocity distribution u inside a steady laminar boundary layer flow around a circular cylinder. The results are for one angular position @ and are presented as a function of the y-coordinate normal to the body surface (y = 0 is at the. body surface). U,(@) = tangential potential flow velocity just outside the boundary layer at the same angular position 0.

180 CURRENT AND WIND LOADS

laminar boundary layer flow past a circular cylinder. The correct
separation angles are approximately +80°. This shows that equation (6.1)
derived from non-separated potential theory does not represent the
velocity field and pressure field outside the boundary layer along the
whole cylinder surface. This was also evident from Fig. 6.2. If we had
used the experimental pressure distribution in the boundary layer
calculations we would have ended up with the correct separation points.

The boundary layer flow will only be laminar up to a certain Reynolds
number, beyond which transition to turbulence occurs. In order to
illustrate this let us define a local Reynolds number Rn, = U..x/v, where
x is the distance along the cylinder surface from the forward stagnation_
Downstream of this point small disturbances will be amplified. Fig. 6.5
shows where the point of instability occurs for flow past a circular
cylinder. This is based on calculations. However, we should note that the
flow outside the boundary layer has been represented by equation (6.1).
This is the reason why the separation point S is not correct. The figure
tells us that the point of instability for Reynolds number 10* is slightly
ahead of the separation point. We note that with increasing Reynolds
number the point of instability occurs further upstream on the cylinder.
However, the flow will not become turbulent immediately downstream of
the instability point. There is a certain transition range before the flow
becorties turbulent. The distance from the point of instability to the )_the
point where the turbulent flow starts has to be experimentally
determined. ee

7 Rn=10°
Rn=td Rn=1 Rn=105
Rogie SEPARATION

POINT

Fig. 6.5. Position of points of instability against the Reynolds number Rn for
steady incident flow past a circular cylinder. (Adapted from
Schlichting, 1979.)

WAKE BEHAVIOUR 181

The separation points for turbulent boundary layer flow differs from
laminar boundary layer. For supercritical and transcritical flow where the
boundary layer is always turbulent upstream of the separation points, the
separation angles are about +120°. From this one sees that the flow
separates. more easily in laminar. boundary layer flow than in. turbulent
layer flow. This is a characteristic for any body shape.

WAKE BEHAVIOUR ve Y
Up to now we have concentrated on what is happening on the cylinder
surface. Only the time-aver; ged flow has been discussed. In reality the
flow is unsteady and eddies are alternatively shed from each side of the

pt c LK dcylinder_and_convected with the flow. The are of the eddies is

Fage & Johansen (1928) studied experimentally the vorticity distribution in the separated flow close to the separation points. The vorticity was
found to be concentrated in thin sheets leaving the separation points. At
some distance behind the body, the sheets were observed to break up

t i ‘ \, into trails o of discrete vortices. Most details were presented for cross-flow
ge past_a flat plate. The vorticity was estimated by measuring ; the ‘flow
velocity and estimating the vorticity from. the two-dimensional definition

of vorticity, i.e. by

ov Ou

o,= ax ay (6.9)
(see equation (2.2)). The area of vorticity close to the flat plate and
outside the boundary layer is presented in Fig. 6.6. An example of the
velocity and vorticity distribution across the vortex sheet, i.e. the area of

FLAT PLATE
0.9 Uob= “0.65 m? s|
Area of vorticity
is shaded
y
of ve, | .
Yo,

Plate of breadth b

Fig. 6.6. Area of vorticity close to an edge of a flat plate in cross-flow.
(Adapted from Fage & Johansen, 1928.)