separated vortex follows the angular position of the separation point. Assume the radial position r, is close to R and the motion of the separation point is negligible. Show by means of equation (7.44) that this means R? r rV-— = ry ~ 4xU sin(wt)sin 6, Fig. 7.19. Flow around a circular cylinder at small KC-numbers. The separated flow is represented by two discrete vortices. (£T = circulations of the shed vortices. Vortex positions (7,, 9,) and (ty, — 9y).)

VISCOUS WAVE LOADS AND DAMPING

(e)

From the unsteady Blasius equation (Graham, 1980) it is
possible to show that the drag force F', due to the two
separated vortices can be written as

2 3
Fi=—p 2 3 Culy ~ In) (7.45)
n=1
where I, is the circulation, and (x,,, y,) is the position of
vortex n. Further, (%,,,9,,) is position of the image of vortex n
inside the circle. Use previous results and evaluate the force
at wt = 7/2 (i.e. velocity maximum of incident flow). Show
that

Cox (*S)sin 6, (7.46)
Pi

Assume reasonable values of 8, and compare the results with
equation (7.24).

8 STATIONKEEPING

Precise position and motion control of ships and other floating structures
is important from a marine operational point of view. Thrusters and
mooring systems are important means of holding a structure against wind,
waves and current. In earlier chapters we have discussed how to evaluate
environmental forces due to waves and current. Wind has not been
covered as extensively as current. One of the reasons is that there are
many similarities between wind and current loads. The most important
differences are perhaps in the differences in magnitude of density and
fluid velocity in the two media. From a fluid mechanics point of view one
may also say that the structural parts above sea level are generally more
complicated than the submerged parts. It is in any case necessary to rely
on model tests to obtain current and wind loads on marine structures.
One has more confidence in using calculations for mean wave loads. This
is particularly true for large-volume structures if one uses an accurate
method based on, for instance, three-dimensional source technique or
Green’s second identity to evaluate the first-order fluid flow.

In this chapter we will discuss forces from mooring systems and
thruster systems.

MOORING SYSTEMS
A mooring system is made of a number of cables which are attached to

the floating structure at different points with the lower ends of the cables

anchored at the sea bed. One type is the vertical tension leg mooring
which is used in connection with tension leg platforms. This is a moored

:stable platform for which the buoyancy exceeds the platform weight, and

the net equilibrating vertical force is supplied by vertical tension mooring
cables secured by deadweight or drilled-in anchors. The mooring lines
provide essentially total restraint against vertical movement of their
upper ends.

In a spread mooring system, several pre-tensioned anchor lines are
arrayed around the structure to hold it in the desired location. The
normal case is that the anchors can be easily moved. This implies that the

‘anchor in operation cannot be loaded by too large vertical forces, and, to

ensure that the anchors are kept in position, it is necessary that a