system (x", y”, 3") that is fixed relative to the ship and coincides with the (x, y, z)-system when the ship does not oscillate (see Fig. 3.13). THEORY —— -—— WAGNER EXPERIMENTS 300 +} -2 7-7-7 CHUANG YAMAMOTO ET AL. FUJITA HAGIWARA ET AL. N oS Ss MAXIMUM PRESSURE Pmay/4p y? 0 5 10 15 B DEAD RISE ANGLE IN DEGREES Fig. 9.9. Variation of maximum impact pressure with deadrise angle for a wedge shaped body. (Hagiwara & Yuhara, 1976.)

294 WATER IMPACT AND ENTRY

We have also drawn a picture of the ship’s velocity U in the figure.
According to an observer on a ship, the ship’s speed acts as an incident
constant velocity U. From the figure we see that this velocity has a
g"-component that is equal to Uns. This has to be accounted for in the
calculation of the z”-component of the relative velocity. From this
discussion we can write up a linear 2"-component of the relative velocity
as

dns __ dns

Vee a

—Uns-—w (9.19)

where w is the z-component of the undisturbed wave velocity in the
free-surface.at the longitudinal position x where ship slamming is to be
‘analysed. The heave and pitch motions may, for instance, be obtained by
a strip theory program if regular incident waves are analysed.

Statistical estimates of slamming pressure in an irregular sea can easily
be obtained if we assume that the magnitude of the impact pressure can

be written as

= ipk |Val? (9.20)

Here k depends on the sectional form, especially the local deadrise angle
at the point considered (see for instance Fig. 9.9). We will assume
short-term stationarity of the irregular waves, i.e the waves can be
described by a sea spectrum S(w). For simplicity we will assume the
waves to be long-crested. If we assume that the maxima (peak values) of
the relative velocity of the ship follow a Rayleigh distribution, we can
write the probability that the maximum of the relative velocity is larger
than v as

P(\V9|>0)=exp( 3-3) 0.21)

0,” = [sc |&

is the variance of the relative velocity and |V,(w)/€,| is the transfer

where
Vr(@)

2 do (9.22)

function of the relative velocity. The latter can be “obtained by analysis of «

the same wave heading as the irregular sea. By combining the pitch and *

heave velocities (see equation (9.19)) we can find the amplitude of the
relative velocity |Vp(w)| divided by the incident wave amplitude ¢,. The
results are ship speed and wave heading dependent. The relative velocity
is normally largest on the fore part of the ship, but large relative
velocities may also cause slamming problems on exposed aft parts of the
ship. In order for slamming to occur at a point A on the surface of the

SLAMMING 295

ship it is necessary that the relative vertical motion at the same
longitudinal position of the ship is larger than the vertical distance d from
the still water surface to point A, The probability for the amplitude of the
relative motion Np to be larger than d can be expressed as

d@

P(x > d) = exp( ~ 55) (9.23)
where ‘
= "s NR(@) 2

[ [la (9.24)

is the variance of the relative motion. This is expression does not account
for the waves being influenced by the ship. In the calculation of the

relative motion we should take this into account.

Using the fact that the relative motion and relative velocity are
statistically independent, we can write the probability that the slamming
pressure becomes larger than a given value p at a specific point A on the
ship as

P(impact pressure > p) = exp| - (4, + *) (9.25)
pko” 207 ,
Equation (9.25) has been obtained by multiplying together equations
(9.23) and (9.21), and then using equation (9.20) with |Vp{ =v to rewrite
equation (9.21).

From equation (9.25) we find the most probable largest slamming

Pressure Pmax in N encountered waves to be

d?
Pax = pko,?(log N- 3) (9.26)

where N can be approximated by ¢/7. Here t is the time duration of the
N encounter waves and 7, is the mean wave period. Both o,, o, and k
depend on the position of the ship where Slamming is to be evaluated. It
should be kept in mind that equation (9.26) is based on using equation
(9.20), ie. no compressibility effects are accounted for (see equation

9.15). We could have substituted equation (9.15) into equation (9.21)
by setting V =v. In this way we would find the most probable largest
“acoustic pressure Pmax* and use the smallest of Pyrax ANd Prax”.

Long-term predictions of slamming pressure can be obtained by
om g equation (9.25) with the joint probability of significant wave
height Ay and mean wave period 7. This.is similar tothe method
déscribed in chapter 3 for long-term Predictions ‘of linear wave-induced

“* Tn a given sea state we can also use equation (9.25) to evaluate the
“probability of slamming. It is then necessary to define how large a
_ pressure has to be to call it slamming. One indirect way is to define a