a relatively small body can be written as F=iF | +jF,+kF; (3.35) where F,= -[f pn; ds + Aja, + Aja2 + Aj3a3 (3.36) s Here p is the pressure in the undisturbed wave field and n= (n,, 22, 73) is the unit vector normal to the body surface defined to be positive into the fluid. The integration is over the average wetted surface of the body. Further, a), a2 and a; are acceleration components along the x-, y- and

62 LINEAR WAVE-INDUCED MOTIONS

a-axes of the undisturbed wave field and are to be evaluated at the
geometrical mass centre of the body.

The first term in equation (3.36) is the Froude—Kriloff force. The
other terms physically represent the fact that the undisturbed pressurefield is changed due to the presence of the body (diffraction force),

If the body is totally submerged, the body is small relative to the
wavelength and the whole body surface is wetted we can show that:

Qa

ny
Wr: nz | ds= pV} az (3.37)
S a3

assumptions not valid for a structure (for instance a tank) standing on the
sea bed where the bottom of the structure is not wetted. However, in the
case of a horizontal sea bed, the fact there is no fluid pressure on the
bottom of the structure does not affect the horizontal forces. Equation
(3.37) is therefore only invalid for the vertical force in this case.
Equation (3.36) is often used together with strip theory to predict wave
excitation forces on semi-submersibles and TLPs when the wavelength is
large relative to the cross-sectional dimensions. Special care should be
taken’ at nat. junctions between _ columns and pontoons in. evaluating. the

then have to integrate the Froude— Kriloff pressure force directly.

We will illustrate this by considering the vertical excitation force F'3(t)
on a TLP (see Fig. 3.15) for long wavelengths. A similar analysis applies
for a conventional semi-submersible drilling platform. A main contribution to F3(¢) comes from the pressure forces acting on the pontoons. A
strip theory approach may be used to estimate these pressure forces
because the pontoons can be treated as slender members. Then, the
vertical wave excitation load on a strip of length, ds, that is remote from
the columns can be written as:

F3= (pA, + A33?) ds a3 (3.38)

where A, is the cross-sectional area, A337” is the two-dimensional
added mass in heave in an infinite fluid, and a3 is the vertical
undisturbed fluid acceleration at the geometrical centre of the crosssectional area. Equation (3.38) is based on a long wavelength assumption
relative to the cross-section. The first term represents the Froude—Kriloff
force (i.e. the pressure force on the cross-section due to the undisturbed
fluid flow). It should be stressed that in equation (3.38) the Froude—
Kriloff representation is valid only when the whole circumference of the
cross-section is wetted. When this is not satisfied, the contribution to the
Froude—Kriloff force should be obtained by properly integrating the
undisturbed pressure p.

RESPONSE IN REGULAR WAVES 63

To derive an expression for F'3(t), we will write
a;= —w’C,e™ sin(wt — kx) (3.39)
_ p= pebse™ sin(oot — kx) (3.40)

where €, is the incident wave amplitude. On the pontoons oriented in the
x-direction we obtain the following vertical force contribution.

— w?t,e""2(pA, + Ass) in sin(wt — kx) dx
B/2
where

B2
[ sin(wt — kx) dx = (2/k) sin wt sin kB/2

~B/2

and z,, is the 2-coordinate of the geometrical centre of the cross-sectional
area. B is explained in Fig. 3.15. On the pontoons oriented in the
y-direction we obtain the following vertical | force contribution,

—w?l,e""(pA, + A33?)B(sin(we — RL,/2) + sin(wt + RL,/2))

where L, is explained in Fig. 3.15. By using only the Froude—Kriloff

25 Jf

Fig. 3.15. Tension leg platform (ASM600). Dimensions are given in metres. Its
main characteristics are presented in Table 5.1.