is twice as large as in equation (7.20). Wang’s (1968) analysis shows that we may write the drag coefficient on a circular cylinder in unseparated laminar high Reynolds number flow as ST (aby + (BY — mB) 7.21) where 6 = Rn/KC = D?/(vT). This differs both from equation (7.20) and Stokes’ solution. The drag coefficient can be very large, (actually it goes to infinity when KC—> 0), but this does not mean that the drag-force is large. ; Cp=

EMRE

238 VISCOUS WAVE LOADS AND DAMPING

Johnson (1978) has given empirical formulas for shear stress that apply
to turbulent flow along fixed plane surfaces. Outside the boundary layer
the flow is oscillating harmonically. When the surface is smooth, Johnson
writes the maximum wall shear stress ty.n aS

2 wm
re = 0.09 RE~°? (7.22)
where ;
Uim
=a. (7.23)

Here U},, is maximum tangential velocity just outside the boundary
layer. RE = 10° is proposed as an engineering criterion for transition to
turbulence. Equation (7.22) can be used as a basis for establishing
slow-drift. viscous surge damping of a ship. We can multiply |t,| by the
wetted body surface and (1+), where k is a form factor with a similar
meaning as for viscous resistance of a ship (see discussion after equation
(6.25)). Typical k-values for viscous resistance vary between 0 and 0.5.

: SEPARATED FLOW AT SMALL KC-NUMBERS
Bearman (1985) has reported the behaviour of the flow around a circular
cylinder for different KC-numbers when the ambient flow is planar and
harmonically oscillating. For KC<7 he says the flow is symmetric. This
implies zero lift force. However, we cannot set up precise limits for the
onset of asymmetric flow. For instance, the data by Bearman (1988) show
that KC = =5 is a limiting value between symmetric and asymmetric
flow. Bearman (1985) reports that a change in the vortex shedding
appears at KC=7 or 8. The majority of the vortex shedding takes place
only on one side of cylinder. The flow has a strong memory in this range.
Between KC = 15 and 25 a vortex is shed before the end of a half cycle.
In addition a second vortex forms from the same shear layer. Vortices
shed previously combine with the new vortices so that vortex pairs travel
away in two trails at roughly 45° to the direction of the main flow. The
directions can be switched. This depends on the starting condition. At
KC>25 at least three full vortices are shed per half cycle. The wake
resembles the wake in steady flow, i.e. the vortices tend to form a street
behind the body.

Results for low KC-numbers (KC < ~10) have relevance for damping
of slow drift motions of moored structures and roll damping of ships and
barges. Graham (1980) has done an interesting analysis for KC—0,
which can be used to explain experimental results for KC< ~10. His
analysis includes only the effect of separated flow on the pressure
distribution around the body. Viscous shear forces have to be added.
Graham argued that the different behaviour of the drag coefficients of
different sections at small values of KC is due to the relative strengths of

SEPARATED FLOW AT SMALL KC-NUMBERS 239

the vortex shedding, a circular cylinder obviously being much weaker
than a flat plate, for example. He assumes that the vortex flow for a small
Keulegan—Carpenter number depends only on the local flow around each
sharp edge. The edge is characterized by its internal angle 6. That means
for a flat plate 6 = 0 and for a square section 6 = 2/2. The vortex force
Fy on a sharp edge acts along the perpendicular to the bisector of the
edge angle. It can be shown to be proportional to KC”, where
n = (26 — 2)/( — 28).

This means that, for example, the drag coefficient Cp for small
KC-numbers should vary as

Cp «KC75 for a flat plate
« constant for a square section
« KC for a circular cylinder (regarded loosely as a
sharp-edged section with 6 = zr)

These variations are in quite good agreement with measured data for
KC < 10, for bodies in planar ambient flow (Graham, 1980). The
experimental data for a diagonal and facing square have later been
corrected by Bearman et al. (1984a). The experimental results show
that

Cp ~ 8.0 KC (flat plate)

Cy ~ 5.0 (diagonal square)

Cy ~ 3.0 (facing square) (7.24)
Cy ~0.2KC (circular cylinder)

The results for a circular cylinder are only of a qualitative nature. This is
evident by comparing with Sarpkaya’s (1986) experimental results.
Sarpkaya examined a circular cylinder in planar oscillatory flow of small
amplitude. The results were presented for different KC and f-values
(8 = Rn/KC). When the boundary layer flow was laminar and the flow
did not separate (i.e. KC<~1) Wang’s formula (see equation (7.21))
agreed well with the experimental results (see Fig. 7.8). When KC > ~2
we note that the Cp-values start to increase with KC-number. This is
what Graham’s asymptotic solution says. However, one should note that
his theory is based on the separation point being fixed. This is not the
case for separated flow around a circular cylinder, particularly at small
KC-numbers.

The nature of the ambient flow is important. The results by Chaplin
(1984, 1988) demonstrate this. Chaplin (1988) presented data for a
submerged horizontal circular cylinder in beam sea waves at small
KC-numbers. The ambient flow was either nearly circular or elliptical.
Chaplin argued that a circulation is set up around the cylinder. This has
a large influence on the mass coefficients. In the particular case of a