has, for instance, consequences for what we mean by current and how current velocities are estimated. In our later discussion on current loads on ships and offshore structures we talk about an ambient constant velocity at fixed points. That means we should not include the transport velocity (equation (2.21)) as a current velocity when there are waves present. However, this does not mean that mass \ Eo) 0 that is approximately 20% of the orbital velocity at the. ho ‘S

22 SEA ENVIRONMENT

transport does not influence the motion of floating marine structures. For
a freely floating vessel, especially one moving with the first-order orbital
motion, mass transport has an effect on the motions. Ogilvie (1983) has
illustrated (see Fig. 2.4) how the transport velocity (equation (2.21)) can
be simulated by using the first-order (linear) solution for the fluid
velocity. As the fluid particle moves, the local linear velocity will change
because the time and the fluid particle position change. The effect over
one period is that the fluid particle has moved a horizontal distance equal
to the Stokes drift velocity times the period.

Schwartz (1974) has provided a solution in terms of a series expansion
that satisfies the exact non-linear free-surface condition within potential
theory. This theory can be used to illustrate the limitation of linear
theory for regular deep water waves. For waves of steepness H/A = 0.1
the exact theory predicts 20% higher maximum wave elevation than the
linear approsimation. For a wave period 12 Sy ie. a wavelength
is not an unrealistic combination of wave height and period and
illustrates, for instance, that linear theory can significantly overpredict
the air gap between the waves and a platform deck.

The analytical solution that Schwartz provides assumes periodicity in
space. It also assumes that the wave form is symmetric about a vertical
axis through the wave crest. This means it cannot be used for studying
plunging breakers and irregular steep waves. By plunging breakers we
mean waves whose tops are turning over, similar to waves breaking on a
beach. Dommermuth et al. (1988) have presented numerical studies of

Fig. 2.4. Trajectory of a fluid particle in sinusoidal waves computed from
first-order (linear) velocity potential (€, = wave amplitude, A=
wavelength, 2, = 2-coordinate of fluid particle at rest.) (Ogilvie,
1983.)

STATISTICAL DESCRIPTION OF WAVES 23

plunging breakers.’ Good agreement was shown between theory and
experiments for a ‘two-dimensional’ plunging breaker produced by a
wave maker, up to the point where the overturning jet re-entered the
water surface.

STATISTICAL DESCRIPTION OF WAVES

The present status of computer facilities prevents us from using
techniques like that of Dommermuth et al. (1988) to obtain statistical
estimates for ocean waves, since the estimated CPU-time makes direct
calculations unrealistic. In addition there are unsolved physical problems
associated with modelling of breaking waves. In practice, linear theory is
used to simulate irregular sea and to obtain statistical estimates. The
wave elevation of a long-crested irregular sea propagating along the
positive x-axis can be written as the sum of a large number of wave
components, i.e.

N
c= S A; sin(@,t — kx + 6) (2.22)

j=l
Here A;, w;, k; and €; mean respectively the wave amplitude, circular
frequency, wave number and random phase angle of wave component
number j. The random phase angles ¢; are uniformly distributed between
0 and 2 and constant with time. For deep water waves @; and k; are
related by the dispersion relationship (equation (2.18)). The wave
amplitude A; can be expressed by a wave spectrum S(w). We can write

1A? =S(w,) Aw oh 1% (2.23)

where Aw is a constant difference between successive frequencies. The
instantaneous wave elevation is Gaussian distributed with zero mean and
variance o” equal to Se S(w)d@, which can be shown by using the
definition of mean value and variance applied to the ‘signa? represented
by equation (2.22). We find for instance that o = YN) A?/2. By using
equation (2.23) and letting N-—»© and Aw 0, we find that o? =
Se S(@) dw. The relationship between a time domain solution of the
waves (i.e. equation (2.22)) and the frequency domain representation of
the waves by a wave spectrum S(q) is illustrated in Fig. 2.5.

The wave spectrum can be estimated from wave measurements
(Kinsman, 1965). It assumes that we can describe the sea as a stationary
random process. This means in practice that we are talking about a
limited time period in the range from 4 hour to maybe 10 hours. In the
literature this is often referred to as a short-term description of the sea.

Recommended sea spectra from ISSC (International Ship and Offshore
Structures Congress) and ITTC 5 (International Towing Tank Conference)
are often used to calculate S(w). For instance, for open sea conditions
the 15th ITTC recommended the use of ISSC spectral formulation for