—y, cos wid i=1 Here 7}; is the horizontal force from anchor line number i. Its direction is from the attachment point of the anchor line towards the anchor. Further, x; and y; are respectively the x- and y-coordinate of the attachment point of the anchor line to the vessel and wp, is the angle between the anchor line and the x-axis as defined in Fig. 8.5. In order Fig. 8.5. Example of spread mooring system for a drilling platform.

266 STATIONKEEPING

for the moored structure to be in equilibrium, F;", F,™ and F,™ have to
balance the mean forces due to waves, wind and current. The problem of
finding the equilibrium position can generally not be solved directly and
an iteration procedure has to be set up.

If we want to find the linear restoring effect of the anchor lines in the
equations of motion we can generalize the procedure outlined in
connection with equation (8.22). We can write

Cy, = >, k; cos” y;
i=l

Cy = S k; sin? Wi
t=1

(8.26)
Coe = >, Ril; sin Yi — Yi COS Y,)
t=]

Cr = Con = SD Rix; sin wz — y; Cos i) sin Y
i=l

Here k; is the restoring coefficient for anchor line number 7. It can be
found as in equation (8.22). The coupling coefficients Cy6, Cory Ci2 and
Cy are zero if the mooring arrangement is symmetric about the x-z
plane.

Example. Static analysis of a spread mooring system
A platform is restrained from moving by two anchors with anchor lines
of chain (see Fig. 8.6). The length / of the anchor line is 600 m and the ;
horizontal pre-tension Ty is 300 kN. The weight of the chain in water
is w = 1000 N m=. Assume static environmental forces on the platform.
(a) What is the distance between anchors A and B?
(b) What is the line tension at the platform?
(c) Find out how large the environmental force on the platform
has to be to move anchor A.

Fig. 8.6. Vessel moored with two anchor lines.

MOORING SYSTEMS 267

(d) Study the displacement of the platform as a function of the

environmental force on the platform.

Solution:

(a) The distance between anchors A and B is given as 2X + L

ww

where X =1—/,+<x and L is the length of the platform. By
using equation (8.21) we find that the distance between the
two anchors is

1060 (m) + LZ

From equation (8.12) it follows that the line tension at the
platform is

T =Ty+wh =S500KN

and (d) Let us first examine mooring line A. Anchor A

will start moving if J, = 1 = 600 m. From equations (8.16) and

(8.17) we will find the corresponding horizontal tension 7), in
cable line A and the x-value for attachment point of the cable

line to the platform (see Fig. 8.3).

We find a = 800 m, Ty = 800 KN and

= 300 sinh»(22) =

x = 800 sinh (Ss 555 m

This means the attachment point of the cable line to the
platform has moved 25 m compared to the original situation.
In order to find how large the environmental force on the
platform has to be to move the platform 25 m, we will first
study the horizontal tension 7, in each cable line as a
function of displacement. This is illustrated in Fig. 8.7 and
can be performed in the same way as described for the vessel
shown in Fig. 8.3. Instead of referring the displacement to
one of the anchor positions, we use the displacement of the
vessel relative to the position that the centre of gravity of the
vessel had when there were no environmental forces acting on
the vessel, i.e. the situation described in the introduction of
the example. From Fig. 8.7 we find that the horizontal
tension in cable line A is 800 KN and the horizontal tension in
cable line B is 140 KN when the vessel has moved 25 m to left.
From this we may conclude that the necessary horizontal
environmental force on the platform in direction A—B to
move anchor A is 800-140 = 660 kN. We may also use Fig.
8.7 to study the displacement of the platform as a function of
the environmental forces on the platform. This may be done
by giving the platform a displacement 6 and finding the