the natural period in roll will have an important influence on the effect of the roll wave damping. The roll wave damping has a tendency to be small due to cancellation effects for normal midship sections. By cancellation we mean that the roll moment caused by the pressure forces on the ship sides tend to counteract the roll moment caused by the pressure forces on the shin hottom. For a circular cross-section the rall damning will he Twa = 2n(

72 LINEAR WAVE-INDUCED MOTIONS

zero if the moment axis coincides with the cylinder axis. If either the
cross-sectional beam is small or large, the cancellation effect will be less
pronounced. This will cause relatively large roll wave damping. This is
illustrated in Fig. 3.17 where two-dimensional roll wave damping
coefficients B,,?” for rectangular cross-sections are shown for different
oscillation periods T as a function of the beam draught ratio B/D. The
oscillation periods in Fig. 3.17 are in a limited range. This means the
data do not show that B,,?”—> 0 when T—> 0 or ~.

Viscous effects can be divided into skin friction effects and viscous
effects due to the pressure distribution around the ship. The last effect is
often associated with eddy making and is therefore called eddy-making
damping in the literature.

The effect of skin friction is more important in model scale than in full
scale. In model scale it cannot be completely neglected, while it is
negligible in full scale. Depending on the frequency and the roll
amplitude, the roll wave damping may be larger or smaller than the
eddy-making damping (Ikeda et al., 1977a). For a ship without bilge

By 4(20) B
pas? 29
0-150 -—

0-125

0-100

0-075

0-050

(2D)

Fig. 3.17. Two-dimensional roll wave damping By," as a function of
beam-—draught-ratio for rectangular cross-sections. Infinite water
depth. The roll axis is in the mean free-surface. (B = beam,

D = Draught, A = submerged cross-sectional area, T = period of
oscillations.) (Vugts, 1968.)

DISCUSSION ON NATURAL PERIODS 73

keels, the bilge radius has an important influence on the eddy-making
damping for midship sections (Tanaka, 1961). The eddy-making damping can be quite large for rectangular cross-sections while it is of less
importance for conventional midship sections. Kato (1966) and Ikeda et
al. (1977b) have given empirical formulas for roll damping due to bilge
keels. The bilge keel damping can very well amount to 50% of the total
damping. Eddy-making and bilge keel damping is non-linear and
expressed in the form of B7,4|74|, where dots stand for time derivatives.
In practical calculations equivalent linearization is used to determine the
roll amplitudes (see exercise 3.5).

Heave and pitch damping of monohull ships are dominated by wave
damping. For catamarans at zero or very low forward speeds small wave
damping may occur due to interaction effects of the two hulls. This
occurs typically when the distance between the hulls is an odd number of
half-wavelengths. A simple way of explaining the phenomenon is to
combine the far-field wave picture generated by each hull and neglect the
diffraction caused by the other hull. We will illustrate what we mean by
considering a two-dimensional case. The wave elevation in the far-field
(y— +) due to forced heave motion of the two hulls is written as

A; sin(@t — k(y — p) + vw) + As; sin(wt — k(y + p) + @)
= 2A; cos(kp) sin(wt ~ky+a) (3.56)

Here A; and a@ are the wave amplitudes and phases caused by one hull as
if the other hull were not there. Further, 2p is the distance between the
centre planes of each hull. We note that equation (3.56) becomes equal to
zero when cos(kp) = 0, i.e. A/(2p) = 2/(2n + 1), n=0,1,... . The most
interesting practical case is when n=0, i.e. when there is half a
wavelength between the centre planes of the two hulls. When the
far-field wave amplitude generated by forced heave oscillation is zero we
know from equation (3.26) that the damping in heave is zero. Both
three-dimensional flow effects and forward speed effects will cause less
cancellation of the far-field wave system around a catamaran. This is
particularly true for a high-speed catamaran.

Small excitation forces may also occur due to cancellation effects. One
example of this is a ship in head sea waves with a wavelength of the order
of the ship length. The phase difference in the vertical excitation loads
along the ship causes the total heave excitation force to be small. Since
the heave resonance period for a ship at zero forward speed corresponds
to a wavelength of the order of the ship length, the heave motion may be
rather small at the heave resonance.

For semi-submersibles and TLPs, the Froude—Kriloff force and the
diffraction force tend to cancel each other at large periods, typically
between 15 and 20s. This is evident from Fig. 3.18.