using equation (6.24) and ° data given in Fig. 6.11. Estimate wind loads by pressure dra formulas. Use drag coefficients equal to 0.8 both for ° longitudinal and transverse wind directions. The projected areas for longitudinal and transverse wind forces are respectively 350 m? and 1400 m?.) Discuss the possibility that the thrusters lose efficiency due to moat effects by making reasonable choices of thruster itions and estimates i i i ine hip end thee of relative vertical motions between

9 WATER IMPACT AND ENTRY

NN

SLAMMING

Impulse loads with high pressure peaks occur during impact between a
body and water. This is often called ‘slamming’ and occurs for instance
when a ship bottom hits the water with a high velocity. The probability
of slamming is highest on the fore part of a ship where the relative
vertical velocity between the ship and the waves is largest. Slamming on
the ship bottom occurs more often in the ballast condition. than in the
full-loaded condition and is a larger problem for ships with large block
coefficients than for fine ship forms. Wave impacts can also cause bow
damage above the waterline. Ship masters normally reduce the speed of a
vessel to avoid slamming. An often used criterion for ‘voluntary speed
reduction’ is that a typical ship master reduces the speed if slams occur
for more than three out of 100 waves that pass the ship.

For a catamaran, slamming can happen on the underside of the deck_

between the two hulls. To avoid slamming on platform decks one
requires an air gap of typically 1-2 m between the underside of a deck
and the most probable highest position the wave can. reach relative to the
underside of a deck in a ‘100 year’ design condition. The columns of a
platform have to be designed for impact loads due to breaking waves (see
Fig. 9.1). Inside ship tanks violent fluid motion (‘sloshing’) can cause
high slamming pressures and damages. Abramson et al. (1974) reported |
that 24 atmospheres of impact pressure had been measured in a tank of
an OBO-ship. %
The duration of slamming pressure measured at one place on the
structure is of the order of milliseconds, It is very localized in space. The
position where high slamming pressures occur changes with time.
Slamming pressures are sensitive to how the water hits the structure. We °
can exemplify this with experimental results of slamming pressures due
to sloshing in tanks. Abramson ez al. (1974) reported model test results
for a typical LNG tankform, similar to the one presented in Fig. 1.2. The
tank was forced to oscillate harmonically in sway and two-dimensional
flow conditions were enforced. Experiments show that even under
harmonic oscillations, the pressure variation is neither harmonic nor
periodic since the magnitude and duration of the pressure peaks vary
from cycle to cycle. A typical histogram for the distribution of peaks is

Fig. 9.1. High slamming pressures can occur when breaking waves hit the
column of a platform. The top photo shows a breaking wave
approaching the column of a platform and the other photo shows the
situation just after the breaking wave has hit the platform. The
photos are from the TCP-2 platform at the Frigg Field on the
Norwegian Continental Shelf operated by Elf Aquitaine Norge A/S.
(Kjeldsen & Andersen (unpublished).)