m. Ty (KN) 150 ——+ 50 1 80 85 90 95 X(m) Fig. 8.4. Example of the horizontal force from an anchor line on a vessel as a function of the horizontal distance X between the anchor and the point where the anchor line is connected to the vessel. (The vessel and the anchor line configuration is shown in Fig. 8.3.) Water depth: 25 m. Weight per unit length of chain in water: 828 N m™?. Chain length: 100 m.

i
i
ie

264 STATIONKEEPING

To find X for a vessel that is moored with a mooring system as
described above we have to know the environmental forces on the vessel.
Let us say that the x-component of the average wave, current and wind
force on the vessel was 50 kN. From Figure 8.4 or equation (8.21) we
find that the average distance X from the anchor line to the point where
the anchor line is connected to the vessel will be 93 m. However, due to
the vessel’s motions in waves the distance X will oscillate around 93 m.
From the figure we note that the horizontal force from the anchor line on
the vessel will also oscillate. If the horizontal motions are not too large,
we may write

Tu=(THmt+Cum

Here (T'4)m is the average horizontal force from the anchor line on the
vessel, i.e. 50 KN in our example, and 7, is the horizontal motion in the
x-direction of the point on the vessel where the cable line is connected to
the vessel. We can find C,, from Fig. 8.4 as the derivative of Ty with
respect to X at (T'y)m. We may also find an analytical expression of Cy).
By differentiating equation (8.21) it follows that

—2 hy |!
C oT _,, = + cosh™(1 +2) (8.22)
ax ~"l (1428) @
h
where a = (7'y)m/w. From this example it is evident that the anchor line

has a spring effect on the vessel.
If we denote the horizontal motion in the x-direction of the centre of

gravity of the ship as 7, we may approximate the surge equation of

motion of the ship as

d d
Shy E+ Cum = Fo

a d
(M +A) SP + Bug, + Bp

(8.23)

where M is the mass of the ship, A,, is added mass in surge, By, isa |
linear damping coefficient, By is a quadratic damping coefficient and -

F(t) is the dynamic excitation force due to waves and wind. From

equation (8.23) we find that resonance in surge will occur when the :

circular frequency of oscillation

w= (St) 2),

M+Ai,

In a practical case resonance oscillations in surge may be excited by

slowly-varying excitation forces due to waves and wind. The mos

important linear damping By, for slow-drift oscillation of a large volume ©

MOORING SYSTEMS 265

structure is due to the wave-drift damping (see chapter 5). The quadratic
damping is due to drag forces on the hull (see chapter 7) and drag
damping from the anchor lines. Strictly speaking we should have
included the effect of the relative velocity between the vessel and linear
incident wave field when we formulated equation (8.23).

Analysis of a spread mooring system

The above procedure for one cable line can be generalized to a spread
mooring system consisting of several cable lines. The relationship
between mean external loads on the vessel and its position can be found
by considering contributions from each cable line separately. We can
write the horizontal forces F,M, F,” and the yaw moment F'.™ from the
mooring lines as

FM = > Ty COS Yj
i=1
FyM= > Ty Sin (8.25)

FM=> Tuilx; sin yj —y, cos wid
i=1

Here 7}; is the horizontal force from anchor line number i. Its direction
is from the attachment point of the anchor line towards the anchor.
Further, x; and y; are respectively the x- and y-coordinate of the
attachment point of the anchor line to the vessel and wp, is the angle
between the anchor line and the x-axis as defined in Fig. 8.5. In order

Fig. 8.5. Example of spread mooring system for a drilling platform.