unstretched length J, (see Fig. 8.3) of the cable from the point where cable first touches the bottom to the attachment point can be written T, i= 3 (8.32) By integrating equation (8.31) in a similar way as in equation (8.7) it follows that h= 1}+- 2 w Leos dy 2AE i Environmental horizontal force =THA-THB 660 al 25m 5 displocement Fig. 8.8. Mean environmental horizontal force on the vessel described in Fig. 8.6 as a function of horizontal displacement.

270 STATIONKEEPING

where cos gy at the attachment point can be written T'y/(Ty? + TZ).
From this equation we can find an explicit expression for Ty, i.e.

(8.33)

We should note that the tension 7 at the attachment point is simply
T =(Ty + Tt (8.34)

Finally, by integrating equation (8.30) in a similar way to equation
(8.6) we find that

Tu (ae +7 2h + Ts) Tu

= — log| ~—__+*—= } +5 .

x D log Ta AE 1, (8.35)

We can now use equations (8.32) to (8.35) in the following way. We start

out by assuming a value of 7, then calculate /, from equation (8.32), Ty

from equation (8.33), T from equation (8.34) and finally x from equation

(8.35).

If we want to find the mooring line characteristics for a given value of
Ty, we have to perform the calculation procedure above for several
assumed values of 7, and then afterwards interpolate the data.

The equations that we have found for cable lines can also be used for
analysis of towing cables. The water depth in the formulas have then to
be replaced by the sag sg of the cable. Further, J, is the same as half the
cable length.

THRUSTER FORCES
Thrusters may be used in combination with a mooring system or alone to
keep a vessel in position. From open water testing one can get a first
estimate of the thruster performance, but a thruster may lose efficiency
due to interaction with other thrusters, the hull, current and waves. One
example of the hull interaction effect is the Coanda effect. This means
that the propeller (thruster) slip stream is attracted by the hull (see Fig.
8.9). A consequence of this is loss of thrust. The Coanda effect can be
explained by representing the propeller slip stream by a circular jet,
which acts like a line of sinks. This means that the water is entrained in

the jet from outside the jet. (For analysis of circular jet flow see -

Schlichting, 1979: pp. 747-50). If the boundary had not been there, the
entrainment velocity would have been directed radially toward the centre

of the jet. The entrained velocity is only a function of the radius. Ifa -

boundary is present, the velocity will be at a maximum between the jet
and the boundary. High velocity means low pressure. This means a

THRUSTER FORCES 271

)
pi = B
pressure difference across the jet with a /resutan force towards the
boundary. The force will attract the jet towards the wall. The attraction
force has to be in balance with the centrifugal force of the jet flow. This
determines the position of the jet relative to the wall. This is illustrated in
Fig. 8.10. For a thin jet initially at a distance / from an infinitely long
wall, it takes roughly 6-h to hit the wall if the jet is initially parallel to

the plane wall. This information. can be used as a rough tool for avoiding

stream by a thin jet. The jet must have a radius comparable to the
propeller radius. Close to the propeller the flow is not jet-like. It actually
takes a distance of about six times the diameter from the thruster before
the propeller slip stream develops into a fully turbulent jet-like flow. The
jet will spread as a function of the distance from the thruster. If we
consider a free jet, i.e. a jet not in presence of a boundary, the points in a
jet where the velocity is half the maximum velocity will spread with an

-angle of about 5°. This spreading may cause the propeller slip stream to

be in contact with the hull before the above attraction effect has fully
developed. When the propeller stream clings to the hull, it behaves like a
wall jet. The wall jet may very well separate from the hull again. This
depends on the local radius of curvature of the hull. If a sharp corner is
present the propeller stream will separate and there will be no significant
thrust loss. It is difficult to estimate theoretically what the loss due to the

Deflection
of jet stream

Higher velocities than
h| opposite side of

Centrifugal
force balanced
by pressure forces

Fig. 8.10. Deflection of propeller slip stream. (Coanda effect.)