case for separated flow around a circular cylinder, particularly at small KC-numbers. The nature of the ambient flow is important. The results by Chaplin (1984, 1988) demonstrate this. Chaplin (1988) presented data for a submerged horizontal circular cylinder in beam sea waves at small KC-numbers. The ambient flow was either nearly circular or elliptical. Chaplin argued that a circulation is set up around the cylinder. This has a large influence on the mass coefficients. In the particular case of a

240 VISCOUS WAVE LOADS AND DAMPING

deeply submerged cylinder in nearly circular orbital flow he found that
Cu ~2—-0.21 KC? (7.25)

The KC-number was less than two and the Reynolds number was of the
order of 10*. Equation (7.25) shows a very strong influence of KC on the

Cy-value. This is opposite to what happens to the Cy-value in planar |

oscillatory flow for small KC-numbers.

Eddy-making roll damping

The results by Graham (see equation (7.24)) demonstrate the different
degrees of damping due to vortex shedding when a body makes small
oscillations relative to the fluid. If we apply his results to eddy-making
roll damping of a rectangular cross-section, it means that the damping is
independent of the KC-number. Another example is roll damping due to
bilge keels. We then start out by writing the normal force F,, on the bilge
keel as

F,= — 5 Cpl ul tu (7,26)

0.2 04 0.6 0.8 10 20 30 40 60 80100

Fig. 7.8. Drag coefficients Cp versus Keulegan—Carpenter number KC for a
smooth circular cylinder at 6 = 1035. (8 = Rn/KC = D?/(vT),
D = cylinder diameter, T = period of oscillation. x Experiments
(Sarpkaya) —Theory (Wang). (Adapted from Sarpkaya, 1986). .

SEPARATED FLOW AT SMALL KC-NUMBERS 241

where b and / are respectively the breadth and length of the bilge keel,
and u is the relative velocity normal to the bilge keel as if the bilge keel
was not there. For instance, if the bilge keel were fitted to a circular
cylinder of radius R and the cylinder were rolling about its axis we can
write wu Ri, when no incident waves are present. If we neglect the
effect of the curvature in the vicinity of where the bilge keel is fitted to
the hull, we can approximate the local flow around the bilge keel with the
flow around a flat plate of breadth 2b in transverse oscillatory flow.
According to Graham’s formula Cp = 8.0(KC)"3 for harmonically oscillating ambient flow. We can write KC= uma, T/(2b). The separated
flow around the bilge keel will also affect the pressure distribution on the
hull. However, for a circular cylinder the hull pressure does not cause a
roll moment about the cylinder axis. By taking the roll moment of
equation (7.26) about the roll axis we will find the following roll damping
moment for a circular cylinder

dng [dn
dt | dt
This shows that bilge keel damping is strongly influenced by the
KC-number. For a general body shape, for instance a typical midship
section of a ship, the approach outlined is only of a qualitative nature.
The undisturbed velocity u will for instance be significantly larger when
the flow accelerates around the bilge radius of a typical midship section.

F,= —4p(KC)73bIR? (7.27)

‘Empirical formulas for the bilge keel damping can be found in Kato

(1966) and Ikeda et al. (1977b).

Viscous slow-drift damping of moored structures
The eddy-making damping is important for analysis of slow-drift
motions of moored structures. One exception is surge motions of a ship
where equations (7.18) or (7.22) can be used to estimate viscous
damping.

The eddy-making damping for sway and yaw motions of a ship can in
some cases be calculated by strip theory and the ‘cross-flow principle’
(see discussion of Fig. 6.11). This means that we write the damping force
similar to that in equation (6.26) and analyse cross-flow past twodimensional cross-sections of the ship.

The drag coefficients depend for instance on free-surface effects,
beam-draught ratio, bilge keel dimensions, bilge radius, current,
Peynolds number, roughness ratio and Keulegan~—Carpenter (KC) number. Some of these effects will be discussed below. In chapter 6 we
discussed KC = © more extensively.

Free-surface effects
The free-surface acts similar to an infinitely long splitter plate (see

’ discussion in chapter 6 on free-surface effects on Cp-values for ship