note that heave and pitch motions are not sensitive to small changes in hull form. However, we should be careful in generalizing the findings to relative vertical motions between the ship and the waves. The phases of heave and pitch motions are then important in the evaluation. ROLL STABILIZATION Rolling of a ship can be a problem and roll amplitudes of 30 and 40° have occurred on ships. Large roll angles make it difficult for the crew to do =

FREE SURFACE TANK

tank breadth, h

U-TUBE TANK
(l= “effective” cross-dimensional length)

mean water depth)

(b=

Fig. 3.23. Passive anti-roll tank stabilisers.

ROLL STABILIZATION 87

_ their job. Many ships have therefore been equipped with roll stabi-

lization equipment, to avoid a strong resonance effect in roll.

The importance of bilge keels to damp roll motion is well known. The
bilge keel damping is due both to the resistance of the bilge keel through
the water and the effect of bilge keels on the pressure distribution around
the body. Empirical formulas for the bilge keel damping can be found in
Kato (1966) and Ikeda et al. (1976, 1977b). In this context we will
concentrate on describing passive anti-roll tanks as means to dampen roll
motions.

Passive anti-roll tanks
Passive anti-rolling tanks have been installed on many ships. Principles
for the free-surface tank and the U-tube tanks are shown in Fig. 3.23.
By changing the water level it is possible to change the resonance
frequency of the free-surface tank. This type of rolling tank is therefore
especially well suited for ships operating with a broad spectrum of
metacentric heights.

A major problem with anti-roll tanks is saturation. When the ship
motions become large, the water motion may hit the tank top. This
reduces the effect of the system.

In order for the anti-rolling tank to work satisfactorily, it is necessary
for the natural period of the water motion in the tank to be close to the
natural period of roll motion. Some people choose to set these two
eigenfrequencies to be equal, while others prefer to set the eigenfrequency for the passive tank to be 6~10% higher than the eigenfrequency
in rolling. The tank’s damping effect will be improved by an increased
ratio between the tank’s and the ship’s metacentric height. Typical
passive tanks have a ratio of 6GM,/GMy between 0.15 to 0.3, where
OGM, means a decrease in the ship’s metacentric height due to
anti-rolling ‘tanks. By means of the tank’s natural period and the
metacentric height ratio 6GM7/GMr it is possible to determine the tank
dimensions.

The highest natural period of a rectangular free surface tank of infinite

length can be written as

Ty = 2a / (= tanh( (3.75)

where h is the water depth in the tank and b is the breadth of the tank
(see equation (2.42)). This is the natural period that is most likely to be
in the vicinity of the roll natural period.

The waterdepth h will in practice be small compared to b. We can then
write

2b
Tr= Gh (3.76)