state response as A, |H(@,)| sin(ayt + 5(@,) + &) (3.3) Here |H(a,)| is called the transfer function, which is the response amplitude per unit wave amplitude. We note also that there is a phase angle 5(w;) associated with the response. Both |H(@,)| and d(@,) are functions of the frequency of oscillation w;. The response can be any linear wave-induced motion or load on a structure. Having obtained the response due to one wave component we can linearly superpose the

38 LINEAR WAVE-INDUCED MOTIONS

response from the different wave components, i.e. we can write
N
2A; |H(@;)| sin(a,t + 5(w;) + 6) (3.4)
j=

In the limit as N—> © and Aw-—> 0 the variance of the response a,” can
be found in the same way as for the waves (see the text after equation
(2.23)). We find

= [ S(w) |H(w)? dw (3.5)

The Rayleigh probability function can be used as a good approximation to find the probability density function for the maxima (peak values)
of the response R, i.e. we can write

p(R)= Syereane 3.6)
0, ak a
Here R may for instance be heave maxima and o, the standard deviation
of the heave motion.
The most probable largest value R,,,, during a ‘short-term’ time ¢ is
then

i
O; log F (3.7)

This is valid for a given value of the significant wave height H 4 and the
mean wave period 72, i.e. for a short-term description of the sea.
Strictly speaking we should have used the mean period for the
response-variable instead of 7, in equation (3.7). However, for linear
wave-induced motions and loads this will mean a negligible difference in
the estimation of Ryax- By combining the Rayleigh distribution with a
joint frequency table for Hy and the modal wave period (or mean wave
period, see Table 2.2) we can obtain the long-term probability in a
similar way to equation (2.39). An important difference is that we have to
sum over both period and wave height, i.e. we must write

M K
P(R)=1-> p> exp(—0.5R?/(0,*))px (3.8)

J=lLR=1
where P(R) is the long term probability that the peak value of the
response does not exceed R, and o,’* is the standard deviation of the
response for a mean Hy and modal period in significant wave height
interval j and modal wave period interval k. Further pj, is the joint
probability for a significant wave height and a modal wave period to be in
interval-numbers j and k, respectively. For instance, by referring to
Table 2.2, the joint probability for the modal (spectral peak) period to be

RESPONSE IN REGULAR WAVES 39

10s and Hy to be between 2 and 3 m is 4456/100 001. The values of M
and K are respectively 15 and 19. The probability level Q = 1 — P(R)
and the number of response cycles N are related by Q = 1/N. A return
period of 100 years corresponds to Q=10~*?. The corresponding
response amplitude R can then be found from equation (3.8).

RESPONSE IN REGULAR WAVES
Since it is possible to obtain results in irregular seas by linearly
superposing results from regular wave components, it is sufficient from a
hydrodynamical point of view to analyse a structure in incident i regular
sinusoidal waves of small wave steepness. This will be done in the
following text. We will assume a steady state condition. This means there
are no transient effects present due to imitial conditions. It implies that

ve? tre Tinéar dynamic motions and loads on the structure are harmonically

oscillating with the same frequency as the wave loads that excite the
structure. The hydrodynamic problem in regular waves is normally dealt
with as two sub-problems namely:

A: The forces and moments on the body when the structure is
restrained from oscillating and there are incident regular
waves. The hydrodynamic loads are called wave excitation
loads and composed of so-called Froude—Kriloff and
diffraction forces and moments.

B: The forces and moment on the body when the structure is
forced to oscillate with the wave excitation frequency in any

rigid-body motion mode. There are no incident waves. The

hydrodynamic loads are identified as added mass, damping and
restoring terms.
Due to linearity the forces obtained in A and B can be added to give the
total hydrodynamic forces. This is illustrated in Fig. 3.1.

Before we go into detail and describe the different hydrodynamic
loads, we will define a coordinate system and the rigid body motion
modes. A right-handed coordinate system (x,y, 2) fixed with respect to
the mean position of the body is used, with positive z vertically upwards
through the centre of gravity of the body and the origin in the plane of
the undisturbed free-surface. If the body moves with a mean forward
speed, the coordinate system moves with the same speed. The body is
normally assumed to have the x—z plane as a plane of symmetry. Let the
translatory displacements in the x-, y- and z-directions with respect to
the origin be |, 2 and 73 respectively so that 7, is the surge, 72 is the
sway and 73 is the heave displacement. Furthermore, let the angular
displacement of the rotational motion about the x-, y- and z-axis be 74,
ns and ne respectively so that 7, is the roll, 75 is the pitch and 7¢ is the
yaw angle. The coordinate system and the translatory and angular
displacement conventions are shown for the case of a ship in Fig. 3.2.