in Sarpkaya & Isaacson (1981). For harmonically oscillating flow around a fixed circular cylinder of diameter D, we may write KC= 2nA/D, where A is the amplitude of oscillation of the fluid far away from the body. We then see that KC expresses the distance a free stream fluid particle moves relative to the body diameter. (6.81) MORISON’S EQUATION Morison’s equation (Morison et al. 1950) is often used to calculate wave loads on circular cylindrical structural members of fixed offshore

224 VISCOUS WAVE LOADS AND DAMPING

structures when viscous forces matter. Morison’s equation tells us that
the horizontal force d¥ on a strip of length dz of a vertical rigid circular
cylinder (see Fig. 3.14) can be written as

‘D?
dF = p™—deCua,+£CpD de |u| u (7.1)

Positive force direction is in the wave propagation direction. p is the
mass density of the water, D is the cylinder diameter, u and a, are the
horizontal undisturbed fluid velocity and acceleration at the midpoint of
the strip. The mass and drag coefficients Cy and Cp have to be
empirically determined and are dependent on the parameters mentioned
in the beginning of the chapter.

Considering deep water regular sinusoidal incident waves (see Table
2.1) and assuming Cy and Cp to be constant with depth (which might
not be realistic), we may easily show that the mass-force decays with
depth like e?"”*. The drag force decays like e**”* and is even more
concentrated in the free-surface zone. When there is a wave node at the
cylinder axis the mass-force will have a maximum absolute value and the
drag-force will then be zero. The drag-force on a submerged strip will
have a maximum absolute value when there is a wave crest or a wave
trough at the cylinder axis. If viscous effects are negligible, it is possible
to show analytically that Morison’s equation is the correct asymptotic
solution for large A/D-values (see discussion of equation (3.34)). The
Cy-value should then be two for a circular cross-section. If fluid
acceleration can be neglected, Morison’s equation is a reasonable
empirical formulation for the time average force. Typical Cp- and
Cy-values for transcritical flow past a smooth circular cylinder at
KC>-=40 are 0.7 and 1.8. A roughness number k/D of 0.02 can
represent more than 100% increase in Cp relative to the Cp-value for a
smooth circular cylinder (Sarpkaya, 1985). This means the effect of
roughness is more significant in oscillatory ambient flow than in steady
incident flow.

The application of Morison’s equation in the free-surface zone
requires accurate estimates of the undisturbed velocity distribution under
a wave crest. The prediction of the velocity distribution based on linear
wave theory was discussed in connection with Fig. 2.2. A straightforward
application of Morison’s equation implies that the absolute value of the
force per unit length is largest at the free-surface. This is unphysical
since the pressure is constant on the free-surface. This means the force
per unit length has to go to zero at the free-surface. It should also be
noted that the position of the free-surface at the cylinder is affected by
wave run up on the upstream side of the cylinder and a wave depression
on the downstream side. The vertical position of the maximum absolute
value of the local force has to be experimentallv determined. The order

MORISON’S EQUATION 225

of magnitude of the position may be 25% of the wave amplitude down in
the fluid from the free-surface. We should note that Morison’s equation
cannot predict at all the oscillatory forces due to vortex shedding in the
lift direction, i.e. forces orthogonal to the wave propagation direction and
in the cross-sectional plane.

Morison’s equation can be modified in the case of a moving circular
cylinder. Consider a vertical cylinder and denote the horizontal rigid
body motion of a strip of length de by 7,. We can write the horizontal
hydrodynamic force on the cylinder as

dF = 3pCpD oe — my) |u- ml
+ Cu D" dea, - p(Cm

(7.2)

Dot stands for time derivative. Both u and a, are position-dependent. It
should be noted that the inertia term does not depend on the relative
acceleration term. The reason for this can be found by studying the
analytical solution in the potential flow case. The Froude-Kriloff force
(i.e. undisturbed wave pressure force) results in a horizontal force
p(aD?/4) dza, which is independent of the rigid body motion (see
chapter 3). The Cp- and Cy-values in equation (7.2) are not necessarily
the same as in equation (7.1).

Morison’s equation can also be applied to inclined members. To
demonstrate this let us consider a cylinder inclined in a plane parallel to
the wave propagation direction. The approach would be to decompose
the undisturbed velocity and acceleration into components normal to the
cylinder axis and components parallel to the cylinder axis, and then use
Morison’s equation with normal components of velocity and acceleration.
The force direction will be normal to the cylinder axis. In the potential
flow case, it can be proven that this is the correct expression. In the
viscous case it means that we use the ‘cross-flow’ principle (see chapter
6). Actually what we are proposing to do for an inclined cylinder is not
different from the vertical cylinder case. In the latter case there is also an
undisturbed tangential velocity and acceleration component in the fluid.
The effect of this was neglected in equation (7.1).

When the cylinder axis is not in the plane of the wave propagation
direction, there exist different possibilities for formulations. Let us
illustrate this using a submerged horizontal circular cylinder in waves
where the wave propagation direction is orthogonal to the cylinder axis.
A straightforward generalization of Morison’s equation would be to write
the horizontal and vertical force on a strip of length dy as

dF, = pw Cua, + £CpD dy u(u? + w)S (7.3)

dF; = pw Cua +£cpD dy w(u2 + w)! (7.4)