of the simulated wake picture by the vortex sheet model of Faltinsen & Pettersen (1987) is presented in Fig. 7.1. The figure shows Fig. 7.1. Free shear layer positions at different times for oscillatory crossflow past a flat plate. KC = UmT/H = a (Uy = velocity amplitude of the ambient flow, T = oscillation period, H = half the height of the plate). Uyt/H = 0.784, 1.584, 1.984, 2.384, 3.184, 3.984, 4.784, 5.584, 6.384, 6.984 (Faltinsen & Pettersen, 1987.)

228 VISCOUS WAVE LOADS AND DAMPING

oscillatory crossflow past a flat plate at different time steps. The arrow
indicates the magnitude and direction of the instantaneous free-stream
velocity. It seems that one pair of vortices return to the body in the last
picture. This creates numerical problems. For larger amplitudes of
oscillation of the ambient fluid, i.e. KC>6-8, asymmetry develops in
the wake. From flow visualizations it is seen that this causes vortices to
pair and travel away from the plate.

In the following text we will base our discussion on viscous loads
written in terms of Morison’s equation. This means we will discuss how
Cp and Cy, depend on the parameters mentioned in the beginning of the
chapter. In particular we will focus on the effect of body form and
KC-number. For small KC-numbers the results have relevance for
various damping problems. The results for large KC-numbers have
relevance for wave loads on a jacket platform in extreme wave conditions.
The structural members of a jacket have characteristic cross-dimensional
diameters D of about | m. In a regular design wave with a return period
of 100 years, the wave height H may be 30 m. This means the maximum
KC-number in this case is KC = tH/D = 94.

Occurrence of flow separation strongly affects the drag forces. We will
start out by discussing this and later on in the text discuss results for
higher KC-numbers.

FLOW SEPARATION
When viscous effects matter for offshore structures, the flow will
generally separate. A consequence of separation is that pressure forces
due to viscous effects are more important than shear forces. There is
some confusion about what is precisely meant by separation in unsteady
flow. There is obviously no disagreement that the flow has separated if
vortices can be clearly observed in the fluid, but it is difficult to set a
precise limit on when one would call a flow separated or not separated.
There is a need for this if approximate analytical and numerical methods
are used for a description of the flow. Telionis (1981) has discussed
criteria for flow separation in unsteady flow. One definition is: ‘Unsteady
separation occurs when a singularity develops in the classical boundarylayer equations’. Even if the boundary layer equations do not describe
the physical fluid behaviour exactly around a separation point, one might
argue that the occurrence of a singularity in the mathematical solution is
an indication that the flow breaks strongly away from the body. On the
other hand one might question if this is a sufficient description of
separation in unsteady flow. The flow may also be called separated if it
does not break strongly away from the body, for instance if there is a thin
recirculating wake close to the body. A necessary requirement for a
recirculating wake to be present in a two-dimensional flow is that the
shear stress is zero at a point on. the body surface, i.e. that the shear

FLOW SEPARATION 229

stress changes sign. This is the normal separation criteria for steady
incident flow. For unsteady flow Telionis prefers to call the point of zero
skin friction the ‘detachment’ point.

The flow around blunt-shaped marine structures with no sharp
corners will not separate in oscillatory fluid motion at very low
Keulegan—Carpenter numbers. On the other hand the flow around
blunt-shaped marine structures will always separate in a steady current.
In the case of combined incident current and oscillatory fluid motion
around a blunt-shaped marine structure with no sharp corners it
depends on the relative current number (see definition in the beginning
of the section) if there exists a limiting KC-number for the flow to
separate. Roughly speaking one may say there is a possibility that the
flow will not separate if the ambient flow velocity in the current direction
changes sign with time.

Sarpkaya (1986) has experimentally examined circular cylinders at low
KC-numbers for different Reynolds numbers. No current was present.
Sarpkaya reported separation occurring for KC-numbers as low as 1.25.

The fact that the flow separates does not mean that vortices or vortex
shedding are easily observed. For instance, Bearman (1985) states in a
paper, previous to Sarpkaya (1986), that nobody seems to have observed
vortices at KC-values less than three. However, observation of vortices
does not necessarily mean that vortices are convected away from the
vicinity of the body, i.e. that vortex shedding occurs. For instance,
Bearman et al. (1981) studied a flow around a circular cylinder at KC = 4
where a pair of vortices generated during one half cycle did not survive
into the next half cycle. When the flow reversed and the vortices were
convected back to the cylinder, their circulations appeared to be
cancelled by vorticity of opposite sign in the boundary layer of the
cylinder. A systematic study of when vortex shedding starts has not been
attempted, but as an example, Williamson (1985) reported symmetric
vortex shedding occurring for a KC as low as four. By comparing this
case to Bearman et al.’s (1981) studies, it is obvious that it is not only KC
that determines when vortex shedding starts: for instance the Reynolds
number must also be an important parameter.

By analysing high Reynolds number laminar start-up flow around
bodies, we can determine in a qualitative way when flow separation
occurs for subcritical flows.

Consider a two-dimensional stationary body in a high Reynolds
number flow. Outside the body the fluid domain extends to infinity. The
boundary layer on the body surface is assumed to be thin and laminar.
The ambient flow velocity U.. is written as

U..= Uy sin(wt — vw) + U, (7.5)

where Uy, U, are constants, ¢ is the time variable, w =22/T is the