non-moving vertical circular cylindrical surface S., away from the body, the free-surface S; and the sea bottom Sp inside S.. (see Fig. 5.3). We should note that S,. does not need to be far away from the body. We can write U,=V, on Sp, and Sp (5.8) U,=0 on S. and So Sittat) VOLUME (Qt) } Fig. 5.2. Illustration of how the control volume £2() changes in a time increment Ac. (U, = normalcomponent ofthe velocity of the surface S).

136 SECOND-ORDER NON-LINEAR PROBLEMS

The force F = (F,, F,, F3) on the body is fs, pn ds. On the free-surface
the pressure is equal to the atmospheric pressure py. However, since
SS Ponds =0 we could just as well define p in equation (5.7) to be the
difference between pressure in the fluid and the atmospheric pressure.
This implies that we can set p = 0 on Sy. The term ¢ ffs gen ds gives no
horizontal component. By time averaging equation (5.7) over one period
of oscillation and noting that the time average of dM/d¢ is zero, we find
that

B= -[[tontevvilds  i=1,2 (5.9)

So

When calculating F; by equation (5.9) we can use Bernoulli’s equation to
calculate the pressure. We should realize that the wetted area of S., is
time-dependent due to the time-varying wave elevation at S,. In
evaluating equation (5.9) correctly to second-order in wave amplitude, it
is only necessary to know the first-order velocity potential (see the
discussion in the beginning of the chapter). The first-order potential can
for instance be calculated by the numerical methods described in chapter
4. If we want to use equation (5.7) for conservation of momentum to
calculate the mean vertical force, we note from equation (5.7) that we do
not get rid of the pgg-term in the integrand and have to include this
contribution from an integral over the free-surface.

Equation (5.9) was derived by Maruo (1960). Newman (1967) derived
a similar formula for the mean wave-drift yaw moment. He started out
_ by using the fluid angular momentum

Ko=p [[[@xwar (5.10)
Q

Fig. 5.3. Control surfaces used in evaluating expressions for mean wave loads
and illustrations of how the normal velocity U,, of the control
surfaces relates to the normal velocity of the fluid.

MEAN WAVE (DRIFT) FORCES AND MOMENTS 137

where r is the position vector relative to the origin of the coordinate
system (x,y, 2), which is fixed in space. The derivation is similar to that
shown for equation (5.7). If we define n, and V, from rx V=
(V4, Vs, Ve) and rXn=(m4, ns, M6), the result is that equation (5.9) is
also valid for the yaw moment with i = 6.

Equation (5.9) also applies in two dimensions. In that case we write S..
for the sum of S,, and S_., where S,, and S_., are vertical control surfaces
for positive and negative horizontal coordinates respectively. The control
surface can be any distance away from the body even if the subscript ‘c”
indicates that the control surfaces S,. and S_.. are far away from the
body.

Maruo’s formula
Maruo (1960) used equation (5.9) to derive a useful formula for drift
forces on a two-dimensional body in incident regular deep-water waves.
The body may be fixed or freely floating oscillating around a mean
position. There is no current and the body has no constant speed.
The velocity potential for the incident waves is written as (see Fig. 5.4)

hoa Sete cos(wt — ky) (5.11)

with €, being the amplitude of the waves. Due to the presence of the
body there will be generated waves. The velocity potential of the

INCIDENT REFLECTED TRANSMIT TED
WAVES WAVES WAVES

~—T
T

©

=S;

Fig. 5.4, Definition of control surfaces and wave systems in the analysis of
drift forces on a two-dimensional body.