1.20 3 Fig. 5.22. Wave-drift force F, and wave-drift damping B,,”? in surge for a vertical circular cylinder that is free to surge in linear motions. Incident regular waves. Infinite water depth. Draught = 3R. The lower figure is obtained from the results in the upper figure. (€, = wave amplitude of the incident waves, wo = circular frequency of oscillations of incident waves, U = current velocity. Positive current direction is in the wave propagation direction, D = diameter.)

wok
Ne

164 SECOND-ORDER NON-LINEAR PROBLEMS

wave-drift damping in an irregular sea we can proceed as for the mean
force, i.e. we can use an equation similar to (5.28). From this we find
that the wave-drift damping is proportional to Hy? in an irregular sea.
Going back to the formula for the standard deviation (equation (5.48))
and noting that Sp is proportional to Hy* we see that the standard
deviation of the slow-drift surge motion is proportional to Hy for higher

‘sea states. This is a somewhat unexpected result when we talk about a

second-order quantity, but experiments show the same tendency.

Faltinsen & Zhao (1989) argued that there also ought to be a
slowly-varying wave-drift damping if there is a slowly-varying excitation
force. This is a consequence of considering the slow-drift velocity to be
quasi-steady. Zhao & Faltinsen (1988) showed that the slowly-varying
wave-drift damping had little influence on the standard deviation of the
motions while it had a significant effect on the extreme values. The
results from the simulations showed that the extreme values of the
motions tended to follow a Rayleigh distribution if slowly-varying
wave-drift damping was included. This means the most probable largest
value Xmax in a storm of time duration t can be written as

\
Xmax = o.(2 log z) (5.50)

where Ty is the natural period of the slow-drift response variable. For a
storm of duration 10 hours and 7y = 100s this means Xa, = 3.430;,.
However, more work is needed both hydrodynamically and statistically
to achieve more accurate and reliable estimates of extreme values for
slow-drift motions. Equation (5.50) should be understood as a rough
estimate.

To get good estimates of extreme values of slow-drift motions from
model tests or numerical simulations a long simulation time is needed.
Fig. 5.23 presents results from numerical simulations. (Transient effects
have been excluded.) Each record simulates the response of the same
system in the same sea state. The differences in the results from one time
series to another are due to random selection of phase angles and wave
amplitudes in equation (5.25). The standard deviations are nearly the
same, while it is obvious that the extreme values differ. About 20
realizations of the same sea state were used to get good estimates of the
most probable largest slow-drift motion amplitude.

__If eddy-making damping is important and a frequency domain
solution is applied (see equation (5.47)), the equivalent linearization
technique can be used to approximate the eddy-making damping term.
This will be illustrated by studying slow-drift sway motion of a moored
ship. For simplicity we will neglect the coupling with yaw and the

SLOW DRIFT MOTIONS IN IRREGULAR WAVES 165

wave-drift damping in sway. The equation of motion can be written as

Here A; is added mass in sway, C2, is restoring coefficient in sway due
to the mooring system, FS” is the slow-drift excitation force in sway.
The slow-drift sway motion is denoted by y. The coefficient Bp can be
expressed as 0.59CpA where p is the mass density of the water, Cp is a
drag coefficient, and A is the frontal area of the submerged structure
against the motion. The problem of finding Cp will be addressed in

Slow drift motion

a a, aa Cars |
le) 2501-0 5002:0 7503-0 10004-0
Time (s) >

Fig. 5.23. Identical simulations of slow-drift motions of a moored twodimensional body. The differences in the results are due to random
selection of phase angles and wave amplitudes.