find the added mass and damping coefficients of most of the cross-sectional forms of ships. This implies that the beam—draught ratio B/D and the sectional area WAVE PROPAGATION DIRECTION A= 95.6m Te =7.8s WAVE PROPAGATION U=10ms~! DIRECTION —— A= 225m Te = 7.8s Fig. 3.21. Illustration to show that the frequency of encounter corresponds to different wavelengths for zero and non-zero forward speed of a ship in head sea. (7, = encounter period, A = wavelength, U = forward speed.)

84 LINEAR WAVE-INDUCED MOTIONS

coefficient o = A/(B « D) are sufficient hull parameters to determine the
added mass and damping coefficients. However, this is not true for bulb
sections for instance. By using results from Tasai (1959) for the added
mass and damping coefficient in heave we can evaluate equation (3.74).
The natural frequency w,3 in equation (3.74) depends on the added mass
coefficient. This means @,3 will not be the same for different crosssectional forms of our ship. The results for heave at resonance in beam
sea as a function of beam-—draught ratio B/D and sectional area
coefficient o = A/(B - D) = Cy are plotted in Fig. 3.22. We can conclude
that the heave motion decreases with increasing beam—draught ratio and
increases with increasing sectional area coefficient. In reality the sectional
area coefficient corresponds to the block-coefficient for our particular
choice of ship.

From the discussion above one may be tempted to conclude that as
long as the cancellation effects of the wave loads along the ship are not
pronounced, the heave and pitch motion in head sea at resonance
decrease with increasing beam—draught ratio and decreasing blockcoefficient. On the other hand, if the cancellation effects are pronounced
we should be careful in making such a statement. The reason is that the
natural periods in heave and pitch are dependent on the hull parameters
and we will get different cancellation effects at the heave and pitch
natural periods of the different hulls. In addition the heave and pitch

3 13
Cal at resonance a Jat resonance
BL
\ sp = 0.666
'
\
2 \ 20 8B.
\ --- Cy ~1.0 ap 79
BL
B.
! 10 sp 7!
ie}
0 2 4 6 8 B/D 0 05 1.0 Ca

Fig. 3.22. Heave amplitude |7,| at resonance of a ship in beam sea as a function
of beam—draught ratio and block coefficient. The ship has a constant
cross-section along its length. (€, = incident wave amplitude,

B = beam, D = draught, C, = block coefficient.) Infinite water
depth.

ROLL STABILIZATION 85

motion increase with increasing Froude number within certain limits.
The conclusions above are based on discussions of transfer functions.

If we combine the transfer functions with a sea spectrum it is obvious
that the root mean square values of the vertical motions will depend on
the ship length L. In addition it is expected that the vertical ship motions
as a general trend decrease with increasing ship length. We do not say
that this always occurs. This depends on the peak period of the wave
spectrum and the ship length.

The vertical motions may depend on hull parameters other than Cx,
B/D and L. Since the waterplane area coefficient Cy can be thought of
as representing the local beam—draught ratio along the ship we may be
tempted to conclude that increasing Cy and keeping draught constant
means decreasing heave and pitch motions. Based on our simplified
theoretical model it would be speculative to include any new parameters,

‘but we should be aware that there is no coupling between heave and

pitch in our simplified model. One reason is that we have selected a ship
model with fore- and aft-symmetry. It is known that coupling effects
between heave and pitch are of some importance. It would therefore be
fogical to introduce a hull parameter characterizing the fore- and
aft-symmetry of the hull, for instance LCB—LCF where LCB and LCF
are respectively the longitudinal centre of buoyancy and floatation.

If we compare our conclusions with Schmitke & Murdey’s (1980)
conclusions from a systematic investigation of frigate hulls in different sea
states, we are in agreement about the influence of L, B/D, Cw and Cy.
Gerritsma et al. (1974) did a series of tests and calculations for regular
waves where the length, draught and block coefficient were kept
constant. The beam and the Froude number were varied. Their results
seem to be in agreement with our conclusions that heave and pitch at
resonance decrease with increasing beam—draught ratio, and increase
with increasing Froude number. , ##.4 **/

It has been reported in the Uterature that the vertical ship motions

depend on the bulb, transom stern, and the pitch radius of gyration. *

Further, ships with U-form seem to have different heave and pitch
motions than ships with V-form. Our simplified theoretical model is not
able to explain this.

We should note that heave and pitch motions are not sensitive to small
changes in hull form. However, we should be careful in generalizing the
findings to relative vertical motions between the ship and the waves. The
phases of heave and pitch motions are then important in the evaluation.

ROLL STABILIZATION
Rolling of a ship can be a problem and roll amplitudes of 30 and 40° have
occurred on ships. Large roll angles make it difficult for the crew to do

=