generalized to irregular long-crested ‘seas by writing N w= >, @,A, cos(a,t — kix + €,) (9.45) t=1 ‘where A, is determined from the sea spectrum and e;, are random phase angles (see equation (2.22)). It is necessary that the wavelength of each wave component in (9.45) is large relative to the cross-sectional dimension of the structure. Equation (9.45) can also be generalized to short-crested seas. : WATER ENTRY PROBLEMS : —> Current Fig. 9.13. Lifting operations of subsea modules.

Signe reer ge

i

impulse

308 WATER IMPACT AND ENTRY

To evaluate the hydrodynamic forces we_need to. know. the infinite
frequency added mass in heave Ag3 as a function of submergence... This
can be calculated independently of the wave field calculation. What
matters is the submergence relative to the water level. This 1s exactly the
same type of calculation we presented in Fig. 9.11 fora circular cylinder.
Miloh (1981) presents similar results for a sphere.

We should not use equation (9.43) when the structure is fully
submerged and close to the free-surface. The reason is that the
free-surface condition @, = 0 used in calculating oy is questionable and
influences the results. When the body is deeply. submerged, we may
again use equation (9.43). In this case dA33/dt = 0. For the exit problem
it is not possible to use equation (9.43). Some exact calculations within
potential flow theory with correct non-linear free-surface conditions have
been given by Greenhow (1988) and Telste (1987). We should note the
very different flow pictures between an exit and an entry of a cyli der.
Fig. 9.14 shows an example of flow visualizations of an exit of a cylinder.
The water above the cylinder is lifted with the cylinder. In the last
picture the free-surface breaks spontaneously under the cylinder.

During the first phase of the impact we may underestimate the forces
(see Fig. 9.11). However, what is important for the global response, of

IT ti is the

the structure during a small time increment Ac after the impa

Ac
I=| F,(e)de (9.46)

‘0

small time relative to a natural period. Typically the interesting natural
periods will be 1-2 s. However, this depends on the stiffness properties

relative to the mass of the structure. A small time increment means a

of the crane. Equation (9.43) is a good approximation in the calculation -

of the impulse.
Equation (9.43) can be further generalized and applied for a ship at

forward speed (see exercise 9.4). An example is the evaluation of ©

hydrodynamic forces on bow flare sections. This can cause large midship
stresses with resulting damage to deck and bottom plates. Loss of bow
parts has been reported.

EXERCISES

9.1 Impact loads on horizontal bracing

A horizontal member (of a jacket) with diameter D =0.5m is in the
splash zone (Fig. 9.15), Regular sinusoidal waves of period 15s and

height H = 30m _ propagate in deep water in the positive x-direction.

Find the vertical slamming force (i.e. the force when the wave hits the-

EXERCISES

Fig. 9.14. Flow visualizations from exit studies of a circular cylinder.
(Greenhow & Lin, 1983.)