the x-, y- and z-directions defined here are opposite the x-, y- and g-directions used in equation (6.44). We can apply equation (6.44) to any offshore structure in a current. However, we should realize that we have assumed infinite, inviscid-and irrotational fluid. As pointed out in the last section this means that there is no hydrodynamic force on the body. This is the reason why equation (6. 44) does not depend on the position of the origin of the coordinate

202 CURRENT AND WIND LOADS

system. The added mass coefficients in equation (6.44) can for instance
be calculated by the source technique presented in chapter 4.

Another application of equation (6.44) could be to study the behaviour
of a submarine in steady forward motion in infinite fluid. This means
that U, = U;=0 and we find

M= e,U,"A3, —e3 UPAy, (6.46)
Since a submarine has port—starboard symmetry it follows that A,, =0
and since A3, is generally non-zero it means that the submarine
experiences a pitching moment. The sign of the moment depends on the
sign of the coupled added mass coefficient A3, between heave and surge.
This effect is also important for SWATH (small water plane area twin
hulls) ships.

We can generalize the way viscous current loads were calculated for a
ship (see equations (6.26) and (6.27)) to offshore structures that consist of
slender structural parts. Examples of the latter are columns and pontoons
of semi-submersibles and of tension leg platforms (TLP). Other
examples would be risers or cables. This means we decompose the
current velocity into one component in the longitudinal direction and one
component in the cross-flow direction of a slender structural part. We
assume that the longitudinal current velocity component causes only
shear forces as shown in equation (6.24) for longitudinal drag forces on a
ship. The cross-flow component causes flow separation. The force on a
cross-section (strip) due to flow separation can be calculated in a similar
way to equation (6.26). Thus, the mean force per unit length can be
written as (see Fig. 6.22)

Fp= £ CpDUy’ (6.47)

FL= - C.LDU,’ (6.48)

Here D is a characteristic cross-sectional length such as the diameter for
a circular cylinder. Further, Fp is the mean force in the same. direction

as the cross-flow component Uy of the current velocity and Fis the.

mean force orthogonal to Fp in the cross-flow plane. Fy is zero for a
single body in infinite fluid when the body is symmetric about. an_axis
parallel to the direction of Uy. Based on equations (6.47) and (6.48) we
can calculate total current force and moment on the structure. This is
similar to that shown in equations (6.26) and (6.27) for a ship. The drag
and lift coefficients Cp and C;, have to be empirically determined.
Important parameters influencing Cp and Cy are discussed in the section
on current loads on ships. In addition it should be noted that there may

CURRENT LOADS ON OFFSHORE STRUCTURES 203

be hydrodynamic interaction between structural parts. For instance, if a
cylinder is placed in the wake behind another cylinder it will experience
a smaller incident velocity and therefore a smaller drag coefficient if the
free stream is used to normalize the drag coefficient. This can be
illustrated by using a theoretical expression for the wake velocities far
behind a two-dimensional body. According to Schlichting (1979: pp.
742-3), we can write. the mean wake velocity component u in the

direction of the incident velocity as

taj- a -? 6.49
Gn} 0.95(—*5) e (6.49)
where
71 =3(0.0222CpDx)-? (6.50)

Here U., is the incident velocity.

Un

Fig. 6.22. Definition of force components on a cross-section of a slender
structural member. (U, = incident current velocity.)