and ds is an element of C. The integration curve C has to be closed, intersect the separation point and otherwise be outside the analysed vortex sheet and not intersect other vortex sheets. This is illustrated in Fig. 6.8, where we for simplicity have assumed that the vortex sheet (free-shear layer) is infinitely thin. The integration direction in equation (6.13) is in the counter-clockwise direction. Then for the vortex sheets leaving the two separation points A and B in Fig.

184 CURRENT AND WIND LOADS

6.8 we can write

op 72 8” (6.14)
ar
“py Uae’ (6.15)

The circulation in a sheet leaving points A and B follows from an
integration of equations (6.14) and (6.15), respectively, with respect to
time. In a flow which starts from rest and with no initial vorticity in the
flow both I’, and I, are initially zero.

It should be noted that the circulation around a curve that circumscribes the cylinder and does not intersect the vortex sheets, has to
be zero according to Kelvin’s theorem (Newman, 1977).

Free-shear layers easily become unstable and turbulent. If the flow is
laminar at the separation point, it will take only a short distance from the
separation point before it becomes unstable and turbulent. This means
wakes are turbulent even if the boundary layer flow is laminar.

VORTEX SHEDDING
In the starting process of separated flow around a circular cylinder a
symmetric wake picture develops, but due to instabilities asymmetry will
soon occur. The consequence is that vortices are alternatively shed from
each side of the cylinder.
Von Karman (see Lamb, 1945: pp. 224~9) has studied the stability of

Separation point

Free shear
layer

UX Integration curve

N eo for calculating

~~ circulation Ts in
free shear layer
leaving separation
point B

Fig. 6.8. Example of a curve used to calculate the circulation F of a free shear

layer leaving a separation point.

VORTEX SHEDDING : 185

idealized vortex streets. He investigated the stability of certain geometrical configurations of the eddies created behind a two-dimensional bluff
body: Each eddy was mathematically represented as a point vortex of
strength magnitude |I'|. The eddies were situated in two parallel rows.
The directions of rotation of the eddies in one row are uniform and
opposite to the rotation in the other row. Von Karman found that only
two different arrangements are possible. The eddies in one row are either
placed exactly opposite those of the other row or they are symmetrically
staggered (Fig. 6.9). The stability investigation lead to the result that the
first arrangement is unstable, The second arrangement is generally
unstable, but become stable for a very definite ratio between the vortex
street width hand distance 1 between two adjacent vortices in the same

row, i, e.

=~ cosh™ 'V2= * 0.28 (6.16)

If we use a . coordinate system fixed to the body, the vortices will move
with a velocity

he

val

T
U.- Ws
NB
Here U., is ‘the incident velocity far upstream.
We can use von Karman’s idealized vortex street to get an estimate of
the vortex shedding period T,. From Fig. 6.9 we find

It should be noted T° and 1 cannot be estimated from von Karman’s
theory. The reason is that there is_no. body geometry involved. Von
Karman’s theory is not limited to a a circular cylinder. For simplicity let
us set h = D where D is the cylinder diameter and let us approximate the
ocities by U,...We may write

T,U.= zs (6.19)

(6.17)

0.28

The non-dimensional vortex shedding frequency may be represented by

Fig. 6.9. Arrangement of vortices in a von Karman vortex street.