than 4m. It is therefore important to design structures with low heave motion so that it is possible to drill in as high a percentage of the time as possible. Semi-submersibles are examples of structures with very low heave motion in the actual frequency domain. Rolling may also be an important motion mode to evaluate, for example for operation of crane vessels or for transportation of jackets and semi-submersibles on ships and barges. Rolling, pitching and accelerations may represent limiting

10 INTRODUCTION

factors for the operation of process equipment on board a floating
production platform.

In the design of mooring systems for offshore structures loads due to
current, wind, wave-drift forces and wind- and wave-induced motion
are generally of equal importance. There are two important design
parameters. One is the breaking strength of the mooring lines. The other
is the flexibility of the riser system which means, in practice, for a rigid
riser system that the extreme horizontal offsets of the platform relative to
the connection point of the riser to the sea floor should be less than say
10% of the water depth.

Wind, current, mean wave drift forces and slowly varying wave drift
forces are also important in the design of thrusters and in station keeping
of crane vessels, diving vessels, supply ships, offshore loading tankers
and pipelaying vessels. Interaction of thrusters with other thrusters, the
free-surface and structures may also be important for dynamic positioning systems, towing and marine operations in waves.

Examples of the main objectives of the hydrodynamic analysis of a
tension leg platform are, to calculate the vertical dynamic loads on the
platform with the purpose of estimating axial forces in the tethers and to
calculate the wave elevation in order to evaluate the air gap between the
waves and the underside of the platform. The minimum air gap is also an
important consideration for other types of platforms.

HYDRODYNAMIC CLASSIFICATION OF

STRUCTURES
Both viscous effects and potential flow effects may be important in
determining the wave-induced motions and loads on marine structures.
Included in the potential flow is the wave diffraction and radiation
around the structure. In order to judge when viscous effects or different
types of potential flow effects are important, it is useful to refer to a
simple picture like Fig. 1.6. This drawing is based on results for
horizontal wave forces on a vertical circular cylinder standing on the sea
floor and penetrating the free surface. The incident waves are regular. H
is the wave height and A is the wavelength of the incident waves. D
is the cylinder diameter. The results are based on the use of
Morison’s equation (see chapter 7) with a mass coefficient of 2 and a drag
coefficient of 1. The linear McCamy & Fuchs (1954) theory has been
used in the wave diffraction regime.

Let us try to use the figure for offshore structures. We will consider a
regular wave of wave height 30m and wavelength 300m. This corresponds to an extreme wave condition. Let us consider wave loads on
the caisson of a gravity platform where typical cross-sectional dimensions
are 100m. This implies equivalent H/D- and A/D-values of 0.3 and 3,
respectively. This means that wave diffraction is most important. If we

ENGINEERING TOOLS II!

consider the columns of a semi-submersible, a relevant diameter would
be approximately 10 m. This implies A/D = 30, H/D = 3, which means
that the hydrodynamic forces are mainly potential flow forces in phase
with the undisturbed local fluid acceleration. Wave diffraction and
viscous forces are of less significance.

For the legs of a jacket a relevant diameter is approximately 1 m. This
implies that viscous forces are most important. By viscous forces we do
not mean shear forces, but pressure forces due to separated flow. The
examples above are for an extreme wave condition. In an operational
wave condition the relative importance of viscous and potential flow
effects are different. We should bear in mind that Fig. 1.6 only provides
a very rough classification. For instance, resulting forces may be small
due to the cancelling out of effects of loads from different parts of the
structure. ,

ENGINEERING TOOLS

Both numerical calculations, model tests and full-scale trials are used to
assess wave-induced motions and loads. From an ideal point of view
full-scale tests are desirable but expensive and difficult to perform under
controlled conditions. It may also be unrealistic to wait for the extreme
weather situations to occur. Model tests are therefore needed. A
drawback with model tests is the difficulty of scaling test results to full
scale results when viscous hydrodynamic forces matter. The geometrical
dimensions and equipment of the model test facilities may also limit the
experimental possibilities.

Due .to the rapid development of computers with large memory
capacity and high computational speed, numerical calculations have

VISCOUS
FORCES

40 WAVE BREAKING — —
* LIMIT

MASS
FORCES

=5 Dd

Fig. 1.6. Relative importance of mass, viscous drag and diffraction forces on
marine structures.