with model tests is the difficulty of scaling test results to full scale results when viscous hydrodynamic forces matter. The geometrical dimensions and equipment of the model test facilities may also limit the experimental possibilities. Due .to the rapid development of computers with large memory capacity and high computational speed, numerical calculations have VISCOUS FORCES 40 WAVE BREAKING — — * LIMIT MASS FORCES =5 Dd Fig. 1.6. Relative importance of mass, viscous drag and diffraction forces on marine structures.

12 INTRODUCTION

played an increasingly important role in calculating wave-induced
motions and loads on ships and offshore structures. A significant step in
the development started about 1970. For offshore structures it was partly
connected with the beginning of offshore oil and gas production and
exploration in the North Sea. However, it is important to stress that
numerical computer programs are also dependent on the development of
hydrodynamic theories. More theoretical research is still needed, in
particular to increase the knowledge on separated viscous flow and
extreme wave effects on ships and offshore structures.

It is unrealistic to expect that computer programs will totally replace
model tests in the foreseeable future. The ideal way is to combine model
tests and numerical calculations. In some cases computer programs are
not reliable. Model tests often give more confidence than computer
programs when totally new concepts are tested out.

When computer programs have been validated and the theoretical
basis of the computer program has been satisfactorily compared with
experimental results, computer programs offer an advantage relative to
model tests. Computer programs can often be used in a more efficient
way than model tests to evaluate different designs in a large variety of sea
conditions. However, sound judgement of results is always important. A
basis for this is physical understanding and practical feeling.

One aim of the book is to provide physical understanding to the reader
and try to simplify the problems mathematically. In this way one can
develop simple tools to evaluate results from model tests, full-scale trials
or computer programs.

2 SEA ENVIRONMENT

The intention of this chapter is to provide the basic information on
waves, wind and current that is needed to evaluate sea loads and motions
acting on ships and offshore structures. It is assumed that the reader has
a basic knowledge of fluid mechanics and is familiar with the concepts of
velocity potential and Bernoulli’s equation. A brief survey of the general
aspects of free-surface fluid flow problems based on potential theory is
given below.

BASIC ASSUMPTIONS
The sea water is assumed incompressible and inviscid. The fluid motion
is irrotational. A velocity potential @ can be used to describe the fluid
velocity vector V(x, y, Z, t) =(u, v, w) at time ¢ at the point x = (x, y, 2)
in a Cartesian coordinate system fixed in space. This means that

cc a
VaVoninr tig tka, (2.1)

ox
where i, j and k are unit vectors along the x-, y- and z-axes, respectively.
A velocity potential has no physical meaning itself, but is introduced
because it is convenient in the mathematical analysis of irrotational fluid
motion. The fluid is irrotational when the vorticity vector

w=VxXV (2.2)

is zero everywhere in the fluid. Also, since water is incompressible, i.e.
V-V= 0, it follows that the velocity potential has to satisfy the Laplace
equation
2 2.
FE, FF, F8_9 (2.3)
ox oy oz
The complete mathematical problem of finding a velocity potential of
irrotational, incompressible fluid motion consists of the solution of the
Laplace equation with relevant boundary conditions on the fluid. We will
show examples of boundary conditions later.
The pressure p follows from Bernoulli’s equation. If we assume the