between the ship and the waves are important responses. Accelerations determine loads on cargo and equipment and are an important reason for seasickness. The relative vertical motions can be used to evaluate the possibility and damage due to slamming and water mechanism around the natural heave period: Rough estimate: V(L/1.5), where L is ship length in metres. Restoring force: Dominating excitation Important damping: Table 1.1. Resonant heave oscillations of ships, offshore structures and high speed vehicles Vessel: Natural heave period:

6 INTRODUCTION

on deck. (Slamming means impact between the ship and the water.) For
a ship it is important to avoid slamming as well as water on deck because
of the resulting local damage of the structures.

Rolling may be a problem from an operational point of view of fishing
vessels, crane vessels, passenger ships and naval vessels. Means to reduce

Local motions Accelerations

Slamming Water on deck

Effect of breaking waves

Liquid sloshing in tanks

Wave bending moments and shear forces

Fig. 1.4. Examples of important seakeeping and wave load problems for
ships.

TRADITIONAL SHIP PROBLEMS 7

the rolling of a ship are therefore of interest. Examples are bilge keels,
anti-roll tanks and active fins. For smaller ships, rolling in combination
with either wind, water on deck or motion of the cargo can cause the ship
to capsize. Another important reason for capsizing of smaller ships is
breaking waves. Several accidents off the Norwegian coast have been
explained by breaking waves. Following sea can cause different critical
capsizing situations. If the wave profile is stationary relative to the ship,
the ship may be statically unstable in roll relative to the waterline defined
by the wave profile. The ship may also lose its directional stability in
following waves. This can happen when the frequency of encounter
between the ship and the waves is small. The result is an altered course
relative to the waves. This situation is called ‘broaching’ and is most
critical with respect to capsizing of ships with small static stability.

Liquid sloshing in tanks may be a problem for bulkships, combination
ships oil—bulk—ore (OBO), liquid natural gas (LNG) carriers and tankers
loading at offshore terminals. There are two reasons why the fluid motion
in a tank can be violent. One is that a natural period for the fluid motion
in the tank is in a period domain where there is significant ship motion.
The other reason is that there is often little damping connected with fluid
motion in a tank. If the excitation period is close to a natural period for
the tank motion, a strong amplification of the fluid motion in a tank will
occur. Liquid sloshing can cause high local pressures as well as large
total forces. Both effects may be important in design.

For larger ships, wave-induced bending moments, shear forces and
torsional moments are important. More specific problems are whipping
and springing. Whipping is transient elastic vibration of the ship hull
girder caused for instance by slamming. Springing is steady-state elastic
vibration caused by the waves and is of special importantce for larger
oceangoing ships and Great Lake carriers. Springing is due to both linear
and non-linear excitation mechanisms. The linear exciting forces are
associated with waves of small wavelengths relative to the ship length.

Ship motions and sea loads can influence the ship speed significantly
due to voluntary and involuntary speed reduction. Voluntary speed
reduction means that the ship master reduces the speed due to heavy
slamming, water on deck or large accelerations. Involuntary speed
reduction is the result of added resistance of the ship due to waves and
wind and changes in the propeller efficiency due to waves. The
importance of involuntary speed reduction is exemplified in Fig. 1.5. It
shows the results of computer calculations for a container ship at a given
sea state. The significant wave height H; is 8.25m. The waves are
assumed longcrested with different propagation directions relative to the
ship. The ship has a length of 185 m. The actual speed at constant engine
power is given for different wave headings together with the design speed
in still water at the same engine power. For instance in head seas the ship