natural period of a rectangular free surface tank of infinite length can be written as Ty = 2a / (= tanh( (3.75) where h is the water depth in the tank and b is the breadth of the tank (see equation (2.42)). This is the natural period that is most likely to be in the vicinity of the roll natural period. The waterdepth h will in practice be small compared to b. We can then write 2b Tr= Gh (3.76)

88 LINEAR WAVE-INDUCED MOTIONS

This shows in a simple way how the tank breadth and tank depth
influence the natural tank period.

For a U-tube tank of constant cross-section A we can write the natural
period as

l

Ty = 2n( 1) (3.77)

where / is a length dimension of the water, defined so that /- A is the
fluid volume (see exercise 3.6(d)).

The reason why the natural period should be selected close to the
natural period of roll motion is that the tank moment is very closely in
phase with the roll velocity and has maximum damping effect when the
tank is forced to oscillate in roll at the natural period of the tank motion.

This is also illustrated in Fig. 3.24. At the resonance of the fluid
motion a hydraulic jump is formed. The position of the jump is close to
the mid-point of the tank when the roll velocity is at a maximum. The
hydrodynamic moment due to the fluid motion inside the tank can be
calculated by noting that the fluid pressure is static below the instantaneous free-surface position. We note that this causes a moment against
the roll velocity. The maximum moment due to the fluid motion occurs
when the hydraulic jump is at the mid-point, i.e. when the roll velocity
is at a maximum.

We will now show how to choose the main dimensions h, 5 and L of a
free-surface tank in a pre-design phase. L is the length of the tank. We
choose b to be the cross-sectional beam of the ship where the tank is
going to be installed. The water depth h is chosen by requiring that

(Ty) tank = (Ty) ron

VELOCITY OF HYDRAULIC
JUMP

_

PRESSURE FORCE
G

bi dbauveuses

Roll motion

Fig. 3.24. Simplified picture of fluid motion in a shallow water tank at
resonance condition shown at the time instant when the roll angle is
zero and the roll velocity is maximum.

EXERCISES ; 89

This means (see equation (3.76)) that the water depth

_1_40°

g (Trou

The length L of the tank is chosen so that SGM,/GMz is between 0.15
and 0.3. We must obviously have the hydrostatic stability requirements

in mind when we do that. In order to assess the effect of the anti-rolling
tanks accurate model tests are needed.

(3.78)

EXERCISES

3.1 Motions and sea loads on a barge (Fig. 3.25)
Suppose a barge is a box-shaped floating body with length L = 200 m,
beam B = 30m and draught D= 15m. Assume constant mass density,
and that the barge has zero forward speed. Assume regular sinusoidal
waves that propagate along the negative x-axis, and use a wavelength A
of 300m and wave height of 20m. Define the velocity potential of the
incident waves as

o= = e™ cos(wt + kx)

(a) Show that the vertical excitation force can be written as

RL
F3 = {pgt,Be~*? ~ gAy,°™kE,e°?} 5 sin()sin or

by means of long wavelength formulas and strip theory.
Discuss applicability of this approximation and what happens
when w—> 0.

Fig. 3.25. Definition of parameters and coordinate system used in exercise 3.1
for the analysis of a barge.