with sway, roll and yaw. This will be assumed in the following text. In order to understand why surge, heave and pitch are not coupled with sway, roll and yaw, we need to study the added mass and damping coefficients. Let us illustrate this by an example and analyse coupled added mass A23 between sway and heave for the case presented in Fig. 3.3, i.e. we consider forced heave motion of a circular cylinder when w—>~, The pressure on the

68 LINEAR WAVE-INDUCED MOTIONS

body is given by equation (3.15). This pressure is symmetric about the
g-axis. A consequence of this is that the resulting horizontal force is
zero. By definition (see equation (3.10)) the added mass and damping
coefficients A,3; and B,3 are zero. For forced heave motion of a general
body shape where the submerged body surface is symmetric about the
x-z plane we will also find that the pressure distribution is symmetric
about the x—z plane. This means no horizontal force and no roll and yaw
moment. A consequence from equation (3.10) is that A,; and B,3 for
k=2,4 and 6 are zero. A similar argument can be shown for forced
pitch and surge motion, i.e. that A,,;, A,s, Bg, and B,5 are zero for
k=2, 4 and 6. If we consider forced sway, roll and yaw motion, the
pressure distribution will be antisymmetric about the x—z plane. This
implies A,,, A3,, Ase, Bix, Bs, and Bs, are equal to zero for k = 2, 4 and
6.

We can combine this information with the fact that there are no
coupling effects between the lateral motions (sway, yaw, roll) and the
vertical and longitudinal motions (heave, pitch, surge) due to restoring or
mass terms (see equations (3.33) and (3.48)). We can then conclude from
the equations of motion (equation (3.47)) that the lateral motions are
uncoupled from the vertical and longitudinal motions.

The equations of motions (3.47) can be solved by substituting
Nn = 7, e1?* in the left hand side. Here 7, are the complex amplitudes
of the motion modes. Dividing by the factor e~'®' the resulting equations
can be separated into real and imaginary parts. This leads to six coupled
algebraic equations for the real and imaginary parts of the complex
amplitudes for surge, heave and pitch. A similar algebraic equation
system can be set up for sway, roll and yaw. These matrix equations can
be solved by standard methods. When the motions are found, the wave
loads can be obtained using the expressions for hydrodynamic forces
which we discussed previously. .

It should be stressed that equations (3.47) are only generally valid for
steady state sinusoidal motions. For instance, in a transient free-surface
problem the hydrodynamic forces include memory effects and do not
depend only on the instantaneous values of body velocity and acceleration (Ogilvie, 1964).

DISCUSSION ON NATURAL PERIODS,

DAMPING AND EXCITATION LEVEL
The natural or resonance periods, damping level and wave excitation
level are important parameters in assessing the amplitudes of motion of a
platform or a vessel. Relatively large motions are likely to occur if the
structures are excited with oscillation periods in the vicinity of a
resonance period. However, if the damping is high or the excitation level
is relatively low due to cancellation effects, it may be difficult to

DISCUSSION ON NATURAL PERIODS 69

distinguish the response at resonance periods from the response at other

periods.
The uncoupled and undamped resonance periods can be written as
Mi + Ai ;

For an unmoored structure there are no (uncoupled) resonance periods
in surge, sway and yaw. For a typical moored structure the natural
periods in surge, sway and yaw are of the order of magnitude of minutes
and will therefore be long relative to wave periods occurring in the sea.
We will see in chapter 5 that non-linear effects may excite resonant
oscillations at these long periods.

The natural period in heave for a semi-submersible or a ship, or any
other type of freely floating body can be written as

M+ An!
pBAy

where A,, is the waterplane area. It is common design procedure for
semi-submersibles to require that the natural periods in heave, pitch and
roll are larger than T = 20s, i.e. high relative to most wave periods
occurring in the open sea. This is possible to achieve by the low
water-plane area of semi-submersibles. For a ship we can write equation

(3.50) as
CzgD A33 3
r= ae( 22 (1442)
3=20 Cuz 1+75

where Cy = V/(BLD) (V = displaced volume of the ship) is the block
coefficient and C,, = A,,/(BL) the waterplane area coefficient. If the ship
does not have forward speed, the heave oscillations at the natural period
will be excited by waves with wavelength

aa 1,3= 2022 D(1+48) (3.51)
Since 2D is in the range of the ship length, equation (3.51) means that
the resonant wavelength is of the same order of magnitude as the ship
length. If the ship has a forward speed it is a different wavelength that
causes the resonant heave oscillations. The requirement for resonance is
that the encounter period T, is equal to 7,3. This means

To

Ty3= 2n( (3.50)

1D np =T,3 (3.52)
To8
This is illustrated in Fig. 3.16. The figure tells for instance that period