move from the wave maker to the other end of the tank? (c) What is the maximum fluid velocity in the tank? (d) Consider an observer situated along the tank side and a time after the wave front has passed by. How long does it take between.two succeeding wave crests to pass the observer? What is the phase of the wave elevation 1.5 m closer to the wave maker relative to the wave elevation at the position of the observer?

36 SEA ENVIRONMENT

(e) What are the answers to the questions in (d) if the observer is
either moving with a velocity 1 ms! toward the wave maker
or away from the wave maker?

Cf) What would the answers to questions (c), (d) and (e) be if the
water depth is either 10 m or 1 m?

2.4 Sea spectrum
Assume a sea spectrum as presented in Fig. 2.9.
(a) Show from the definitions of Hy and 7, that a = 1.5 and
b=(2zn)"!.
(b) What is the relationship between 7, and 7?

2.5 Standard deviations of fluid velocity and acceleration in
short-term sea states

(a) What are the standard deviations of the horizontal velocity
and accelerations given by equations (2.33) and (2.34) when
N-and Aw— 0.

(b) Assume the wave spectrum is either given in the form of
equation (2.24) or equation (2.30). Explain why the standard
deviation of the fluid acceleration does not exist for all points
in the fluid. How should the wave spectrum look for the
standard deviation of the fluid acceleration to exist for all
points in the fluid?

(c) Generalize the results in (a) to short-crested sea by using
expressions similar to equation (2.38). Discuss the results.

WT;
05 aq oat

Fig. 2.9. Sea spectrum used in exercise 2.4. (Hy = significant wave height,
‘T, = mean wave period based on first moment of the spectrum).

3 LINEAR WAVE-INDUCED MOTIONS
AND LOADS ON FLOATING
STRUCTURES

Linear theory can, to a large extent, describe the wave-induced motions
and loads on semi-submersibles, ships and other large-volume structures. However, non-linear effects are important in severe sea states and
in describing horizontal motions of moored structures.

Consider a structure in incident regular waves of amplitude ¢,. The
wave steepness is small, i.e. the waves are far from breaking. Linear
theory means that the wave-induced motion and load amplitudes are
linearly proportional to C,.

RESPONSE IN IRREGULAR SEA
A useful consequence of linear theory is that we can obtain results in
irregular waves by adding together results from regular waves of different
amplitudes, wavelengths and propagation directions.
Let us explain what we mean by considering a long-crested irregular
sea described by a sea spectrum S(w). We write the wave elevation as

ny IRE
C= > A, sin(@,t — Rjx + &) 3.1)
=
where
1A? = S(w) Aw (3.2)

(see equations (2.22) and (2.23) with explanations). Because of linearity
we can analyse the response to each wave component in equation (3.1)
separately. Examples of response types could be heave or pitch motion
of a floating structure. Formally we can write the steady state response as

A, |H(@,)| sin(ayt + 5(@,) + &) (3.3)

Here |H(a,)| is called the transfer function, which is the response
amplitude per unit wave amplitude. We note also that there is a phase
angle 5(w;) associated with the response. Both |H(@,)| and d(@,) are
functions of the frequency of oscillation w;. The response can be any
linear wave-induced motion or load on a structure. Having obtained the
response due to one wave component we can linearly superpose the