sinusoidal incident waves. When the added resistance is at its maximum, a dominant contribution in the formula is the relative motion term t | Due to bow !' ! Due to 1 wave reflection; shipmotions | ! 0.5 1.0 A/L Fig. 5.11. Typical wavelength dependence of added resistance Raw of a ship at moderate Froude number in regular head sea waves. (€, = wave ‘amplitude of incident waves, A = wavelength, L = ship length, B =beam of the ship.)

148 SECOND-ORDER NON-LINEAR PROBLEMS

where the integration is with respect to the waterline curve, c, m is the
longitudinal component of the outward normal to c, op is the relative
vertical motion along c.

“In the case of a ship with a constant cross-section, we can re-express
this formula in the form

P= Bea? ~ Ean?) (5.24)
where B is the beam of the ship and pn and Cx, are the relative vertical
motions at the bow and the stern respectively. This formula does not
imply that the added resistance is linearly dependent on B, since the
relative motion €, is also dependent on B (see discussion in chapter 3).
Equation (5.24) can be used to discuss how the added resistance in the
‘ship motion’ range depends on main hull characteristics (see exercise
5.3).

Irregular sea calculations
When the results of mean wave loads in regular waves are known, it is
easy to obtain results in an irregular sea. We will show a formula for the
loads. We assume long-crested seas that can be described by a sea
spectrum S(w). In deep water we can write the velocity potential of the
incident waves correctly to first order in wave amplitude as

N
g=>d a e** cos(w,t — kx cos B — ky sin B + 6) (5.25)
jal Wy
Here f is the angle between the wave propagation direction and the
x-axis, «, the circular frequency of oscillation and k; the wave number of
wave component number j, w,; and k; are connected through the
dispersion: relationship «;’/g=k,;. The phase angles €, may be considered as random phase angles and the amplitudes A; may be
determined by the wave spectrum S(w) characterizing the sea state. If
the major part of the wave energy is concentrated between the circular
frequencies Win tO Wmaxs We divide the frequency interval Win tO Wmax
into N equal sub-intervals and call the mid-points of the jth interval a;
(see Fig. 5.12). A; is then determined by
A? = Main

+ =S(w @;) aaa

2 (5.26)

In principle we should let N>%, @pin—>0 and Wmax—> © So that the
sum in equation (5.25) becomes an integral. If N is kept finite and we
want to use equation (5.25) to simulate an irregular sea, the signal repeats
itself after a period 2%N/(@max ~ Wmin). To avoid this we can choose a;
randomly in each sub-interval Aq, in Fig. 5.12.

“MEAN WAVE (DRIFT) FORCES AND MOMENTS 149

Let us now imagine that we want to find the mean wave loads on the
structure by using the direct pressure integration method. One part of
the procedure is to study the effect of the quadratic velocity term in
Bernoulli’s equation, i.e. equation (5.1). In equations (5.2) and (5.3) we
studied the consequence of using an idealized sea state with two wave
components. The results in equation (5.3) show that we can linearly add
together the mean force contribution from each wave component. This
may be surprising since we talk about a system that is non-linear in the
wave amplitude. The same would have happened if we had used N wave
components. Similar summation can be done for the other contributions
to the mean wave loads. What we now say is that the mean wave load can

be _written-as..

i= 3 (Soe a 2 i=l,...56 (5.27)

15:00
11-25
a
Nn
— 7-50

“wu
3-75
fe)

min AwWs

w(rad s!)

Fig. 5.12. Illustration of how the energy in a wave spectrum S(@) can be
distributed into energy of regular wave components of circular
frequency w. (ISSC-spectrum, Hy = 8 m, T, = 10s, number of
wave components N = 22.) See also Fig. 2.5.