water were . performed by Minsaas et al. (1986), based on a quasi-steady assumption. As long as the thruster is not ventilating, this is legitimate, since the wave-induced motions occur with a much lower frequency than the propeller rotation. However, when the propeller is in a transient "ventilating condition, there is also a frequency connected with the development of the ventilated area on the propeller blades. This wave-induced effect cannot be simulated by means of results in calm : water.

274 STATIONKEEPING

The tests in calm water were performed with different propeller axis
submergences h relative to the free-surface. By the quasi-steady
assumption one can interpret 4 as the submergence of the instantaneous
position of the propeller axis below the instantaneous position of the
wave surface. (see Fig. 8.12). By averaging the propeller thrust and
moments in time one can find the effect of the wave-induced motions of
the ship on the thruster characteristics.

Typical model test results from calm water are shown in Fig. 8.13
where the thrust is presented as a fraction of the thrust for a fully
immersed propeller:

_ Kx(h/R)
Bree

and for different immersions and number of revolutions ”. R means the

(8.38)

oO

K1/Kto

LOSS OF
PROPELLE!
DISK

LOSS OF
PROPELLER DISK AREA

+
STEADY WAVE
GENERATION

+

UNSTEADY LIFT

0.5 1.0 H/R

h(t)

Fig. 8.12. Quasi-steady approximation of the effect of waves on propeller
characteristics when ventilation does not occur. (K7/K-, = the thrust
as a fraction of the thrust for a fully immersed propeller.)

THRUSTER FORCES 275

propeller radius. -It is observed that the number of revolutions has a
marked influence on the results. The effect of loss of effective propeller
area is important. When h/R < 1.0 the ratio of the immersed disk area
A, and the total disk area of the propeller is:

Bo= a (8.39)

If we assume that the thrust is proportional to A,, Bp» gives the thrust
reduction for small m-values as illustrated in Fig. 8.13. For large
n-values we see that the thrust is very low for the small h/R-values.
This is due to propeller ventilation. Qualitatively it can be explained as
follows. Increased m means increased loading. This means large suction
pressures on the propeller. The lower the pressure is, the more likely it is
that ventilation occurs. For h/R = 1.0-1.5 there is a very rapid variation
in thrust. This is when ventilation starts. The behaviour of 8 in waves is
not quasi-steady when the propeller is in a transient ventilating state.
The maximum thrust is reached later in time than maximum immersion.
In most of the cases maximum thrust never reaches the same thrust value
as when the propeller was fully immersed in static conditions.

Minsaas et al. (1986) have tried to apply their experimental results for
a ducted propeller and bow thruster in regular waves to thrust loss for
different ships and sea states. An example for a 250m long ship is
presented in Fig. 8.14. The results will depend on, for instance,

- propeller shaft submergence, propeller diameter, propeller pitch,
propeller revolution and hull form. The results in Fig. 8.14 show that

even a large ship experiences considerable thrust losses in rough sea.

67 n=5,0 revss*

x fy n=12,.S5 revs ©
x — fo 4!

-0,5 0 os 10 45 20 WR

Fig. 8.13. Loss of thrust due to reduced immersion of a bow thruster in calm
water. Model scale. ( 8 = thrust divided by thrust for deeply
‘ submerged propeller. By (see equation (8.39)), 2 = number of
propeller revolutions per second, 4 = propeller axis submergence
relative to the free surface, R = propeller radius.) (Minsaas et al.,
1986.)