axis in the mean free-surface. The results are based on numerical calculations. We should note that B3°*”/(@wA) approaches the finite value 8/z when w—> 0. This implies that the damping coefficient goes to zero when w—>0. As pointed out earlier this is what is expected from physical & arguments. F The added moment in roll for the same cylinder depends on the choice i of roll axis. If we select the roll axis to go through (0,0), there is no

50 LINEAR WAVE-INDUCED MOTIONS

normal velocity component induced by the forced roll motion. This
means no fluid motion, i.e. roll added moment and damping are zero in
this case.

All the examples above have been two-dimensional cases. The
two-dimensional added mass and damping coefficients may be combined
with strip theory to obtain an approximation to the three-dimensional
added mass and damping coefficients for a ship. The principle is to
divide the underwater part of the ship into a number of ‘strips. (about 20).
This is illustrated in Fig. 3. 7. Two- dimensional _ Coefficients. _are_caldamping coefficient is wanted. Using strip’ theory. implies — ‘that the
variation of the flow in the cross-sectional plane is much. Jargerthan the
variation of the flow in the longitudinal direction. This will not be true at
the ends of the body. Let us illustrate the use of strip theory to find

8/T

Fig. 3.6. Two-dimensional added mass and damping in heave and sway for
circular cylinder with axis in the mean free-surface. Infinite water
depth. (A,,° = added mass in sway, B,,°” = damping in sway,
A33? = added mass in heave, B3;7> = damping in heave, p = mass
density of water, A = 0.52R?, w = circular frequency of oscillation).

Fig. 3.7. IHustration of strip theory for ships.

RESPONSE IN REGULAR WAVES 51

added mass and damiping coefficients by considering a cylinder of finite
length L with constant circular cross-section of radius R. The x-axis
coincides with the cylinder axis and the x-coordinates of the cylinder
ends are at +/2. The cylinder is assumed to be in infinite fluid. As an
example let us consider how to find the added moment in pitch Ass.
Following the definition of added mass we have to study forced pitch
oscillations. A strip with average longitudinal coordinate x and length dx
will be exposed to a vertical acceleration —x#j;. Associated with this
acceleration there will be a vertical added mass force on the strip that is
equal to pxR? dx xij;. This force creates a moment about the y-axis. By
integrating over the cylinder length we find the total pitch moment to be
[— paR? §%2,. x? dx]ij;. As a matter of definition this moment is equal
to —Assij;. This means Ass = :pmR7L?. Since there is no free surface
Bs; =0.

The added mass and damping coefficients can be significantly influenced by the body shape. Numerical methods have to be used in a
general case to estimate these coefficients (see the following chapter 4). In
two-dimensional problems for ship cross-sections either source techni-

4iv3—ques. oF gonformay mapping techniques are most commonly used. Lewis
‘orms are examples arising from a conformal mapping technique that

applies to most free-surface piercing ship cross-sections in deep water.
Implicit in applying the method we say that the non-dimensionalized
added mass and damping coefficients will only depend on the beam—
draught ratio B/D, the sectional area coefficient o=A/(B:D) and a
non-dimensionalized frequency of oscillation like w(D/g):. Here A
means the submerged cross-sectional area. This result will be used in a
later section when we discuss how ship motions depend on main hull
parameters.

Added mass results based on Lewis form technique are presented in
Fig. 3.8. This shows the added mass in heave for infinite frequency as a
function of B/(2D) and o= A/(B-D). Only the range 0.5<0<1.0 is
shown. Outside this range both for larger and very small o-values the
Lewis form transformation represents a poor geometrical approximation
of typical ship cross-sectional shapes. For cross-sections with sharp
corners, for instance rectangular sections, the results are only approximate. The results in Fig. 3.8 can also be applied to heave added
mass values for cross-sectional shapes in infinite fluid when the body has
the y-axis as a symmetry axis. The height of the body in the oscillation
direction 3 is 2- D and the cross-sectional area of the body is 2: A. The
added mass-value A337 will be twice the values obtained from Fig. 3.8.

For semi-submersibles we will later calculate the response for
wavelengths that are large compared to the cross-sectional dimensions of
the structural parts. This implies small potential-flow damping
coefficients and frequency-independent (w—>0) added mass coefficients