jet. The wall jet may very well separate from the hull again. This depends on the local radius of curvature of the hull. If a sharp corner is present the propeller stream will separate and there will be no significant thrust loss. It is difficult to estimate theoretically what the loss due to the Deflection of jet stream Higher velocities than h| opposite side of Centrifugal force balanced by pressure forces Fig. 8.10. Deflection of propeller slip stream. (Coanda effect.)

272 STATIONKEEPING

Coanda effect is. Limited full scale experience from a supply ship
indicates that the Coanda effect may cause a 30—40% loss of thrust for a
given power. In that case the propeller stream followed the ship hull all
the way up to the free-surface. If the propeller stream had separated
from some point on the hull surface, it is expected that this would have
caused a smaller loss. For semi-submersibles the Coanda effect for a
thruster on one pontoon may cause the propeller stream to hit another
pontoon. The loss due to this can roughly be estimated by considering
the propeller stream to be an incident current on the other pontoon.
Another case for a semi-submersible would be if the thruster is aligned
longitudinally along a pontoon. Due to the long distance the propeller
slip stream is likely to be completely attracted to the pontoon. The
boundary flow between the wall jet and the pontoon will cause shear
forces. This may amount to 10-15% loss of power.

Loss of efficiency due to current
The forces generated by a tunnel thruster are affected by the flow of a

current past the entrance and exit of the tunnel. Model test results taken
from Chislett & Bjgrheden (1966) and presented in Fig. 8.11 show the
percentage loss of side force as a function of vessel forward speed.

The loss of thrust is caused by deflection of the jet stream and by

Thrust
‘Thrust in still water

o6

O-4

o-2

(o) 0-4 os 12 16
Vessel speed
Thruster jet speed

Fig. 8.11. Bow thruster performance. Effect of ahead current/vessel speed.
(Chislett & Bjgrheden, 1966.)

THRUSTER FORCES 273

interactions between the jet stream and the hull which give rise to suction
forces on the tunnel exit side of the vessel.

In order to illustrate the results in Fig. 8.11, we may evaluate the
propeller jet velocity V; by

V,= (4) (8.36)

where T is the thrust and Ag is the propeller disk area. This follows from
conservation of momentum in the fluid. For instance, with T = 130 kN,
Ap= 3.5m’, V,=6ms7'. A current speed of 1ms7' along the ship
centerline means that the thrust of a thruster working in the transverse
direction of the ship is ~80% of the still water thrust.

Minsaas et al. (1986) have argued that a similar effect to this must be
present in waves. They did experiments with a fictitious bow thruster
system in head waves. The ship sides were simulated by vertical plates
parallel to the incident regular waves. The whole system was restrained
from oscillating. At the propeller centre the wave velocity amplitude was
written as

Vy, = wl,e7* (8.37)

where hy is the still water submergence of the propeller shaft.

By interpreting V,, as a current velocity they were able to predict
trends in their experimental results. If a ship is moving in waves the
problem becomes more complicated. The velocity across the propeller jet
at the tunnel entrance is no longer V,. This problem area requires
further research.

Influence of free-surface effects on thruster characteristics
In this section we will talk about other effects of the wave-induced
motion on the thruster behaviour. These are associated with the thruster
coming close to the free-surface. Depending on the thruster loading this

. may cause air ventilation with a serious loss of propeller thrust and
* torque. ‘

In order to study the effects of waves, tests in calm water were

. performed by Minsaas et al. (1986), based on a quasi-steady assumption.

As long as the thruster is not ventilating, this is legitimate, since the
wave-induced motions occur with a much lower frequency than the
propeller rotation. However, when the propeller is in a transient

"ventilating condition, there is also a frequency connected with the

development of the ventilated area on the propeller blades. This
wave-induced effect cannot be simulated by means of results in calm

: water.