be |, 2 and 73 respectively so that 7, is the surge, 72 is the sway and 73 is the heave displacement. Furthermore, let the angular displacement of the rotational motion about the x-, y- and z-axis be 74, ns and ne respectively so that 7, is the roll, 75 is the pitch and 7¢ is the yaw angle. The coordinate system and the translatory and angular displacement conventions are shown for the case of a ship in Fig. 3.2.

Damping and Restoring
forces and moments

Added mass

Excitation loads

Fig. 3.1. Superposition of wave excitation, added mass, damping and

restoring loads.

RESPONSE IN REGULAR WAVES 4I

The motion of any point on the body can be written as
s=mnitnjt+nkt+oxr

where ‘ X’ denotes vector product and
@ = nat nj + Nek, r=xi+yj+2k, |

and i, j, k are unit vectors along the x-, y- and z-axis, respectively.
This means

s=(M,+2Ns — Nei + (N2- aN +xNo)i
+ (3 +9N4— xN5)k (3.9)

We should note that 7, 72 and 73 do not need to be the translatory
motions of the centre of gravity of the bedy.

Added mass and damping terms

The added mass and damping loads _are_steady-state..hydrodynamic
forces and moments due to forced harmonic rigid body motions. There
‘are no incident, waves. However, the forced motion of the structure
generates outgoing waves. The forced motion results in oscillating fluid
pressures on the body surface. Integration of the fluid pressure forces
over the body surface gives resulting forces and moments on the body.

By defining the force components in the x-, y- and z-direction by F,,
F, and F; and the moment components along the same axis as F,, Fs
and F,, we can formally write the hydrodynamic added mass and

damping loads due to harmonic motion mode n; as

cdf of Easy Brswnp ae i

Fig. 3.2. Definitions of coordinate system, rigid-body motion modes and
wave propagation direction. U is the forward speed of the ship.

42 LINEAR WAVE-INDUCED MOTIONS

A, and B,; are defined as added mass and damping coefficients. There is
a total of 36 added mass coefficients and 36 damping coefficients. If the
structure has zero speed, half of the coefficients are zero for a structure
where the submerged part has one vertical symmetry plane. For this to
be true for a structure with forward speed, it is necessary that the vertical
symmetry plane is parallel to the forward direction. The word added
mass may be misleading, since not all of the terms have,limension of
mass. Some of the terms like A,,, have dimensions of an inértia moment.
Other terms like A,; have dimensions of mass multiplied by length. It
can be shown that A,; and B,, are functions of body form, frequency of
oscillation and the forward speed. Other factors like finite water depth
and restricted water area will also influence the coefficients. If the
structure has zero forward speed and there is no current it can be shown
that Ay = Ayr and By = = By.

Let us give a more detailed explanation of added mass and damping by
considering forced harmonic heave motion of a structure. The heave
motion causes the fluid to oscillate which means there is a pressure field
in the fluid. To find the fluid motion and pressure field it is convenient to
use the velocity potential. The velocity potential satisfies the Laplace
equation in the fluid. In addition boundary conditions have to be
imposed. On the body surface it is required that the normal component
of the fluid velocity is equal to the normal component of the forced heave
velocity. On the sea bed it is required that the normal component of the
fluid velocity be equal to zero. Boundary conditions on the water surface
are derived by requiring that the fluid pressure is equal to atmospheric
pressure and that fluid particles will always remain on the free-surface
(see chapter 2). At infinity a radiation condition is required. When the
structure has zero forward speed and there is no current present, the
far-field solution represents outgoing waves. When the velocity potential
is determined, the pressure can be found by using the linearized
Bernoulli’s equation. Excluding the hydrostatic pressure and integrating
the remaining pressure properly over the body we obtain a vertical force
on the body. The linear part of this force is written as

dns
de

d2
F3= —A33 are B33—— (3.11)

This force is obtained by integrating the linearized pressure over the

mean position of the body. A33 is added mass in heave and B3;; is heave
damping. The concept of added mass is sometimes misunderstood to be
a finite amount of water which oscillates rigidly connected to the body.

-This is not true. The whole fluid will oscillate and with different fluid

particle amplitudes throughout the fluid. In three-dimensional flow the
amplitudes will always decay far away and become negligible. The added

RESPONSE IN REGULAR WAVES 43

mass concept should be understood in terms of hydrodynamic pressure
induced forces as above.

High-frequency limit of added mass in heave of a half circle

We will illustrate added mass in heave of circular cross-section with an
axis in the free-surface by an example. Consider an infinitely long
horizontal circular cylinder. In calm water the cylinder axis is at the
free-surface level. We want to find the two-dimensional added mass in
heave for very high frequencies (w-—>®). By considering a very high
frequency we are simplifying the problem. However, the results are _
useful in analysing high-frequency phenomena like ship vibrations: 7 By
two-dimensional, we mean that we study the flow in the cross-sectional
plane and find forces per unit axial length of the cylinder.

In order to find added mass in’neave for w—>~ one has to solve a
boundary value problem for the velocity potential @ as illustrated in Fig.
3.3. From Fig. 3.3 we note that the velocity potential satisfies a
two-dimensional Laplace equation in the fluid domain. On the mean
wetted body surface we have the boundary condition

op

Bp = 7 008 4 In| @ cos et for r=Rand —2/2<0S2/2

(3.12)

Here (r, 8) are polar coordinates and 73 = |n3| sin wt is the forced heave
motion of the cylinder. Equation (3.12) approximately states that the
normal component of the fluid velocity is equal to the normal component

2 2

$+ 5 <0

oe =-cosO|7,|wcoswt

Fig. 3.3. Boundary value problem for forced heave motion 73 = |"3| sin wt of
a circular cylinder at very high frequencies .