value of the horizontal component of the velocity is beneath either a wave crest or a wave trough. It should be noted that the linear theory assumes the velocity potential and fluid velocity to be constant from the mean free-surface to the WAVE PROFILE GIVEN TIME INSTANT x DYNAMIC PRESSURE Z- COMPONENT VELOCITY X- COMPONENT ACCELERATION Z~ COMPONENT ACCELERATION Fig. 2.1. Wave elevation, pressure, velocity and acceleration in long- crested sinusoidal waves propagating along the positive x-axis (see Table 2.1).

20 SEA ENVIRONMENT

free-surface level. This was assumed when the free-surface conditions
were formulated. The horizontal velocity distribution shown in Fig. 2.2
for the flow under a wave crest is consistent with linear theory. Fig. 2.2
also shows the velocity under a wave trough, where we have used the
analytical velocity distribution up to the free-surface level. It is then
implicitly assumed that the difference betw nthe horizontal velocity at
the wave trough and the analytical fictiti Velocity at z=0 is small
compared with the velocity itself. Fig. 2.3 shows how the pressure varies
with depth both under a wave crest and a wave trough. It should be
noted that the ‘hydrostatic’ pressure ‘—pgz’ should cancel the dynamic

Wave propagation direction
—

Horizontal velocity
distribution under
a wave crest.

Horizontal velocity
distribution under
a wave trough.

Fig. 2.2. Horizontal velocity distribution under a wave crest and a wave
trough according to linear wave theory. (The x- and z-axis have
different scales).

“Hydrostati Cc pressure
pate ™

_— —— KE
“Hydrostatic” pressure } x
Pako | Total_pressure, \ aN
i P9ka val Be N
ofal pressure
| P4920 {
| \
KR N Linear
Linear dyno mic \ dynamic ]
pressure pressure
~pav/at ~pavyat

Poa P9ta

i
|
|
|
I
[
|
|

Fig. 2.3. Pressure variation under a wave crest and a wave trough according
to linear wave theory.

are

REGULAR WAVE THEORY 21

pressure —p 9/2dt|,-9 at the free-surface (see equation (2.13)). This is
exactly satisfied at the wave crest in Fig. 2.3 whereas there is a
higher-order_error u under the wave trough. By ‘higher-order error’ we
mean that the error is approximatel ortional to €,”, where the order
n=2. We should note that th dynamic pressure —p Op/dt half a
wavelength down in the fluid is only 4% of its value at z=0. The
analytical form of the velocity and pressure distribution that we have
used is not the only one that wou y fpnsistent with linear theory. For
instance, if we assume that the e edt ial variation of the velocity
distribution continues above the mean free-surface, this will also cause
an error of O(€,”) and be consistent with linear theory.

Linear theory represents a first order approximation in satisfying the
free surface conditions. It can be improved by introducing higher order
terms in a consistent manner—a Stokes’ expansion. The next approximation would solve the problem to second order in the parameter
¢,/4 characterizing the wave amplitude/wavelength ratio of the linear

Tae: Ce ee .
(first-order) solution. Second-order theory means that we keep in a

consistent way all terms proportional to (&,/A)’ and €,/A. For sinusoidal
uni-directional progressive deep water waves where the solution in Table
2.1 represents the first-order (linear) solution, it is possible to show that
the second-order velocity potential is zero, and that the second-order
wave elevation €, is

—26,'k cos[2(ct — kx] (2.20)

By combining this with the first- order solution ¢, sin(wt — kx) we see
that the second-order solution sharpens the wave crests and makes the
troughs more shallow.

The average fluid velocity at one fixed point in the fluid is zero
according to the second-order theory. However, if we follow fluid
particles in time based on linear theory, its average velocity (transport
velocity or Stokes drift velocity) over one period will be horizontal and
equal to

.’ we? (2.21)

for deep water. Here 2 is the z-coordinate of the fluid particle in its
equilibrium position (i.e. when there are no waves). As an example a
wave of 100m wavelength and amplitude €, of 3m implies a transport
velocity at 29 = ve
same place. This has, for instance, consequences for what we mean by
current and how current velocities are estimated. In our later discussion
on current loads on ships and offshore structures we talk about an
ambient constant velocity at fixed points. That means we should not
include the transport velocity (equation (2.21)) as a current velocity when
there are waves present. However, this does not mean that mass

\
Eo)

0 that is approximately 20% of the orbital velocity at the.

ho

‘S