the range of the ship length, equation (3.51) means that the resonant wavelength is of the same order of magnitude as the ship length. If the ship has a forward speed it is a different wavelength that causes the resonant heave oscillations. The requirement for resonance is that the encounter period T, is equal to 7,3. This means To Ty3= 2n( (3.50) 1D np =T,3 (3.52) To8 This is illustrated in Fig. 3.16. The figure tells for instance that period

70 LINEAR WAVE-INDUCED MOTIONS

Ty = 12s causes heave resonance when the vessel is heading with a speed
10ms~' (19.4 knots) against the waves. At zero speed, resonance is
caused by a period of 7.8s. For head seas it means that the wavelength
that creates resonance increases with the forward speed. If the vessel
changes direction, for instance to bow sea (6 = 45° heading), a resonant
heave oscillation will not occur for a speed of 10 ms™! and wave period
Ty = 12s. It would occur if the ship had a speed of 10 ms~'/cos 45°=
14ms!.

The natural period in heave for a tension leg platform can be written as

M+ An)
EA/lI

where E, A and / are respectively modulus of elasticity, cross-section
area of the tendons and length of the tendons. The stiffness due to the
waterplane area is negligible in comparison with the restoring effect of
the tendons. We note from equation (3.53) that the heave natural period
increases with increasing tendon length (i.e. the water depth). Similar
considerations apply for the pitch and roll natural periods. Generally
speaking, the natural periods in heave, pitch, and roll of a TLP will be
low relative to most wave periods occurring in the open sea. However,
they may be excited by non-linear second-order effects (see chapter 5).

Ty3= 2x( (3.53)

SPEED (ms

~ 6000 a0 40000 ~ 12000

—>
NATURAL PERIOD OF
VESSEL MOTION (S)

Fig. 3.16. Relation between resonance period, wave period, forward speed and
wave propagation direction.

DISCUSSION ON NATURAL PERIODS - FI

The uncoupled natural. period in pitch for a freely floating body like a
ship or a semi-submersible can be written as

Mrss + Ass) (3.54)

n= 2a
Bos = 2m\ "VGN,

where rs, is the pitch radius of gyration with respect to an axis parallel
with the y-axis through the centre of gravity, Ass is the pitch added
moment and GM, is the longitudinal metacentric height. For a ship, 155
can be approximated as 0.25 times the ship length. The order of
magnitude of 7,,; for a ship is the same as 7,3.

The uncoupled natural period in roll is

Mra? + Agg\}
a) (3.55)

pP& VGMr

where 144 is the roll radius of gyration with respect to an axis parallel
with the x-axis through the centre of gravity, Ay, is the roll added
moment and GM, is the transverse metacentric height. For a ship, r44 is
typically 0.35 times the beam. The transverse metacentric height
depends on the loading condition. A design rule/recommendation for a
ship is to try to select natural periods in roll larger than 10s. In this way
rolling is not a problem in small and moderate sea states. The parameter
which has most influence on the natural period is the metacentric height.
Tn4 is typically 4-6s for small fishing vessels, 8-12 for conventional
merchant vessels and up to 20-25s for specialized heavy lift vessels.
Semi-submersibles have 7,4 in the range of 35-50s. T,4 depends very
much on the stability requirements and how the ship is built with respect
to damage stability.

Ships without roll stabilization equipment are exposed to strong
resonance effects in roll. The amplitude at resonance depends on the
damping level. The damping in roll for a ship at zero Froude number,
i.e. zero forward speed, is due to wave generation, viscous effects and
roll stabilization equipment. At high Froude numbers the lifting effect of
the hull and the rudders is important. By lift we do not mean that there
is a vertical force, but that the ship and the rudders act as lifting surfaces
in a hydrodynamic sense. The roll wave damping is due to the waves
created by the roll motion and is frequency dependent. When the
frequency goes to zero or infinity, the roll damping goes to zero. Since
the roll damping dominates the roll motion around roll resonance, the
natural period in roll will have an important influence on the effect of the
roll wave damping. The roll wave damping has a tendency to be small
due to cancellation effects for normal midship sections. By cancellation
we mean that the roll moment caused by the pressure forces on the ship
sides tend to counteract the roll moment caused by the pressure forces on
the shin hottom. For a circular cross-section the rall damning will he

Twa = 2n(