‘the maximum pressure occurring close to the centre line of the cylinder. When x > ~0.5 m the slamming pressure is determined from Wagner’s analysis. As pointed out earlier the slamming pressures are very local in Ve oO TEST No 1 ~ 9 2 4 3 p, 0.1 p, 0.2 x/R Fig. 9.8. Maximum impact pressures on a circular cylinder as a function of time after initial impact (V = 8ms~', R =5 m). (Hagiwara '& Yuhara, 1976.) P2 P,

292 WATER IMPACT AND ENTRY

time and space and the maximum slamming pressure does not occur
simultaneously around the cylinder surface.

In design of local structural parts against slamming loads, the peak
value of the slamming pressure gives a conservative estimate of thé load
distribution. This has been discussed by Hagiwara & Yuhara (1976).
They introduce an ‘equivalent static pressure’ p,q in analysing the strain
of a rectangular panel due to slamming load. eq is defined as uniformly
distributed static pressure which causes static strain equal to the
maximum transient strain during impact. In an example with a
0.45 m X 0.31 m panel, which is part of a circular cylinder surface of
radius 5 m, they found that the magnitude of Peq was about one-third of
the maximum impact pressure Pmax- However, this result will obviously
be a function of the size of the panel.

Case 2. Wedge

We will apply Wagner’s (1932) analysis to a wedge. We define a deadrise_

angle B which is the angle between the wedge side and a horizontal line
through the wedge apex. The vertical coordinate ny(x) of the wedge
surface relative to the wedge apex can be written as

n(x) = x tan B (9.16)

It now follows from equation (9.11) that Ao(a/2) = tan B. From equations (9.10) and (9.9) it follows that

nV
n= l
of) 2 tan B (9.17)
From equation (9.14) it follows that
ad
Conan = cotan’ B (9.18)

Theoretical calculations are shown in Fig. 9.9 together with experimental
results. The calculations are in fair agreement with experimental results.
We note that equation (9.18) breaks down when B— 0, i.e. when the
bottom of the wedge becomes more and more flat. When a flat-bottomed
body enters the free-surface, it is known that the airflow between the
body and the free-surface is important at time. instances when the
airgap between the body surface and the free-surface is small relative
to the transverse dimensions of the body (Verhagen, 1967). The
free-surface elevation depends on the pressure in the air above the
free-surface and the pressure in the air depends on the gap between
the free-surface and the bottom. The water elevation is first noticeable at the edges of the body (see Fig. 9.4). This causes the air to be
entrapped between the free-surface and the body. If the body has a
small deadrise angle, say 2—3°, the air will not be entrapped (Koehler &

SLAMMING 293

Kettleborough, 1977). The entrapped air will have a pronounced
cushioning effect, and the impact pressure on the hull is therefore
sensitive to small changes in angle between bottom and water surface.
This indicates that it is difficult to create deterministic flow situations for
impact problems. This was also pointed out in the discussion of Fig. 9.2.

When calculating bottom slamming on ships the relative vertical
velocity between the ship and the waves is an important quantity. We
ought to be precise about what we mean by vertical velocity. It is not the
vertical velocity in a (x, y, 2) system fixed in space (see Fig. 3.13), but it
is the 2”-component of the velocity in a coordinate system (x", y”, 3") that
is fixed relative to the ship and coincides with the (x, y, z)-system when
the ship does not oscillate (see Fig. 3.13).

THEORY
—— -—— WAGNER

EXPERIMENTS
300 +} -2 7-7-7 CHUANG
YAMAMOTO ET AL.

FUJITA
HAGIWARA ET AL.

N
oS
Ss

MAXIMUM PRESSURE Pmay/4p y?

0 5 10 15
B DEAD RISE ANGLE IN DEGREES

Fig. 9.9. Variation of maximum impact pressure with deadrise angle for a
wedge shaped body. (Hagiwara & Yuhara, 1976.)