waves may become small for certain wavelengths and headings and result in small drift forces. This is typical for a TLP. ML 0,35 0 10 2030 45 60 75 90 05120 135 160 180 Bldegrees) Fig. 5.6. Transverse drift force F, on a ship as a function of wave heading B for two wavelengths A. Infinite water depth. (L = ship length, B = 0° in head seas, 6, = wave amplitude of the incident waves.) (Faltinsen et al,, 1979.)

142 SECOND-ORDER NON-LINEAR PROBLEMS

As a first approximation one may imagine the columns of a TLP as
independent wave generators. Dependent on the wavelength and heading
‘the wave fields generated by each column may either tend to enforce or
cancel each other.

If a roll resonance occurs, equations (5.16), (5.17) and (5.18) are not
expected to give satisfactory results for ship hulls. The reason is that
viscous effects are important in calculating roll resonance amplitudes (see
chapter 3) whereas the formula is based on potential flow theory.

Direct pressure integration method

Another way to obtain mean wave forces and moments is to use the
direct pressure integration method (Pinkster & van Oortmerssen, 1977).
This means one starts out with Bernoulli’s equation for the pressure and
formally writes forces and moments on the hull correctly to second order
in wave amplitude. All three force components and three moment
components can be obtained. However, to avoid inaccuracies care should
be taken in using the method. For instance, if a boundary element
method is used to calculate the linear flow motion and one assumes
constant velocity potential over each element, one has implicitly said that
the tangential velocity is zero over the element. This means error in the
calculation of the quadratic velocity term in Bernoulli’s equation, in
particular close to sharp corners. There are ways to avoid this difficulty,
for instance by extrapolating “calculated values of fluid velocities from
points along the normal to “he element that are further away than a
characteristic length of the element.

We will exemplify the method by analysing incident regular deepwater waves on a two-dimensional free-surface-piercing body. We
assume the wavelength is very small and that the surface of the cylinder
is vertical at the intersection with the free-surface. Since the wavelength
is small, the cylinder will not oscillate in the waves. Further, the effect of
the waves is only felt in the free-surface zone on the ‘ upstream’ side. On
the ‘downstream’ side there is a shadow region. From a/ hydrodynamic
point of view this means that we could just as well study incident waves
on a vertical wall (see Fig. 5.7). The linear solution of this problem can
be written

Q= = PEs cos wt cos ky

Physically this represents standing waves. The maximum wave elevation
at the wall is twice the incident wave amplitude. If we calculate the finear
hydrodynamic force, we find

fe)
Fa] es

dz = 2p8oa7 sin wt
y=0

MEAN WAVE (DRIFT) FORCES AND MOMENTS 143

This is a harmonically oscillating force, which cannot explain the
drift-forces. We have to include higher-order terms in our analysis. This
‘Means we must integrate over the exact wetted surface of the body and
use the complete Bernoulli’s equation. Further, we have to solve the
hydrodynamic problem to higher-order in wave amplitude. However, it
can be shown as discussed earlier that the contribution from the
second-order potential to the mean force is zero in regular waves. Let us

start out with Bernoulli’s equation

ao, _p (22) (22)')
=— ={{——-} +{—— 5.19
b= —pR-PAr~ FG, Ba 6.19)
We will calculate the force correct to second order in wave amplitude and
exclude the hydrostatic force.

The contribution from the two first terms in equation (5.19) can be

written as
~oe [ adz— poo S| f= pel,’ (5.20)

z=0

Here oe 26s sin wt is the wave amplitude at. the. wall. The third term in

{(- ) (F ‘|
2 Jaw \\ dy Zz
Pp ° 14, a
= ay 3 gee at 2e2* dz = 286.
“- Whee

The total sum is (pg/2)¢,?. This is the correct asymptotic value for small
wavelengths according to Maruo’s formula. We can generalize the
asymptotic formula to any structure as long as the structure has vertical

Fig. 5.7. Incident waves and drift forces on a vertical wall.