the steady wave system and the oscillatory effects of ship motions. Care should be shown in applying the theory for En = U/(Lg)t > ~0.4. Another limitation of strip theory is the assumption of linearity between response and incident wave amplitude. This means it is questionable to apply in high s with ship slamming and water on deck occurring. Fig. 3.13. Influence of forward speed U on the body boundary condition for a ship forced to oscillate in pitch 75.

58 LINEAR WAVE-INDUCED MOTIONS

Strip theory is also questionable to apply for ships with low length to
beam ratios. The reason is that strip theory is a slender body theory. On
the other hand, the Seakeeping Committee of the 18th ITTC concludes
that strip theory appears to be remarkably effective for predicting the
motions of ships with length to beam ratios as low as 2.5.

Restoring forces and moments
When a body is freely floating, the restoring forces will follow from
‘hydrostatic and mass considerations. We may write the force and
moment components as

Fy = Crit (3.32)

which defines the restoring coefficients C,;. The only non-zero
coefficients for a body with the x-z plane as a symmetry plane for the
submerged volume are

C33 = pgAwp

Css=Css= —p9 | [ xds

Cus = pgV (Zp — 2g) + 18 | | y? ds = pgVGMr

Awp

_ _ 24. 7aSVi
Css = pgV (2p — 2G) + PE [f= ds = pgVGM, CL ote

Awr Pfte?

Here Awp is the waterplane area, V is the displaced volume of water, 2
and zg are the z-coordinates of the centre of gravity/and centre_of
buoyancy, respectively. GMr is the transverse metacenttic height, GM,
is the longitudinal metacentric height. We can, for instance, deduce C33
by considering forced heave motion and analysing the resulting changes
in buoyancy forces due to the hydrostatic pressure ~—pgz. This can be
linearly approximated as —pgA,,73. From this C33 follows from equation
(3.32). For a moored structure additional restoring forces have to be
added. However, the effect of a spread mooring system on the linear
wave-induced motion is generally quite small. In special cases, in
particular for long wavelengths, the mooring system will have an
influence.

Linearized wave exciting forces and moments
The wave exciting forces and moments on the structure are the loads on
the structure when the structure is restrained from oscillating and there
are incident waves. We assume the waves are regular and sinusoidal. The
unsteady fluid pressure can be divided into two effects. One effect is the

RESPONSE IN REGULAR WAVES 59

LBQAY fe &
unsteady pressure induced by the undisturbed waves. The force due to
the corresponding undisturbed pressure field is called a Froude—Kriloff
force. In addition there will be a force because the structure changes this
pressure field. This force is called a diffraction force and may be found in
a similar way as the added mass and damping coefficients, i.e. one has to
solve a boundary value problem for the velocity potential. The main
difference is the boundary condition on the body, where the normal
derivative of the diffraction velocity potential has to be opposite and of
identical magnitude as the normal velocity of the undisturbed wave
system. In this way we ensure that the normal component of the total
velocity on the structure is equal to zero. Let us illustrate this by
considering a vertical cylinder standing on the sea floor and penetrating
the free-surface. A horizontal submerged cross-section of the cylinder is
shown in Fig. 3.14. The figure defines polar coordinates such that
x=rcos@, y=rsin@. The unit normal vector n is written as n=
cos i+ sin 6j. The undisturbed pressure, i.e. the Froude—Kriloff pres-

Fig. 3.14. Horizontal submerged cross-section of a vertical cylinder.