pressure can be obtained by om g equation (9.25) with the joint probability of significant wave height Ay and mean wave period 7. This.is similar tothe method déscribed in chapter 3 for long-term Predictions ‘of linear wave-induced “* Tn a given sea state we can also use equation (9.25) to evaluate the “probability of slamming. It is then necessary to define how large a _ pressure has to be to call it slamming. One indirect way is to define a

296 WATER IMPACT AND ENTRY

threshold velocity V., and say that slamming occurs when the relative
velocity is larger than V.,. For instance Ochi (1964) sets the threshold
velocity equal to

Ve, = 0.093(gL)} (9.27)

where L is the ship length. The probability that slamming occurs can
then be written as

P(slamming) = exp( - (vs, + a’ )) (9.28)

20, 20,

This can for instance be used for studies of voluntary speed reduction.
An often used criterion is that a typical ship master reduces the speed if
slams occur more than 3 of 100 times that waves pass the ship. This
means that if P(slamming) is calculated to be larger than 0.03, the ship
speed U used in evaluating o, and a, in equation (9.28) is too high. It
should be reduced to a level so that P(slamming) is less than_0.03.
However, it should be kept in mind that additional criteria are also used
for ‘voluntary’ speed reduction. Ochi & Motter (1974) say that for a ship
in fully-loaded condition voluntary speed reduction does not occur if

P(water on deck) < 0.07

and (or)
P(significant acceleration in the bow > 0.4 g)< 0.07
For a ship in ballast condition voluntary speed reduction does not occur
if
P(slamming) < 0.03
and (or)
P(significant acceleration in the bow > 0.4 g) < 0.03

Fig. 9.10 shows an example of calculations of voluntary speed reduction
for a 170 m long ship in head sea long-crested waves as a function of sea
state or significant wave height. For smaller sea states the involuntary

speed reduction due to added resistance in waves and wind determines’

the reduction in ship speed at full engine power.

WATER ENTRY PROBLEMS

In the case of a horizontal jacket truss in the splash zone one is not .
particularly interested in the high pressures occurring when the water hits :

the member. One is more interested in the force on the body as the

cylinder hits the water and proceeds through the water. One’ of the first .

‘calculations of this type was done by von Karman (1929) for a related

WATER ENTRY PROBLEMS 297

problem with seaplanes. He used the free-surface condition ¢ =0 and
measured the wetted length from the calm water level. The force was
written as d(A33V)/dt where A;; is the infinite-frequency added mass
coefficient. in heave for the body asa function of submergence. The
added mass calculations were simplified by using flat plate results giving
the same result as equation (9.3) when c(t) is measured from the
intersection point between the cylinder and the still water level. The
formula does not account for buoyancy and incident wave effects.

The formula can be derived by momentum considerations. We will
show this when there are no incident wave effects. Infinite water depth is
assumed, We start out with equation (5.7) which says that

Me —p fl [(E+22)n+ vv, - u,)| ds (9.29)

We should note that the positive normal direction is out of the fluid
domain. The momentum of the fluid inside S can be written as

M(t) = {I pégnds (9.30)

RY

This follows from Gauss’ theorem (see equation (5.6)). By using e=0

‘on the still water level and neglecting free-surface waves, we get no
contribution from the free-surface integration in equations (9.29) and
e 30). Further, by replacing the pressure p at S.. by Bernoulli’s

Ship speed
(knots)

Head sea long-crested
waves

20 Ship length L =170 m

Involuntary
speed
reduction Voluntary speed

reduction

3 6 9 12 Significant
wave height (m)

Fig. 9.10. Ship speed in various sea states due to involuntary and voluntary
speed reduction.