&] . a QO wi O04 SELON LLG RES 02 SERS NNER ESS ‘ % O7 DO "I o-8 0-7 Fig. 5.19. Calculated values of the second-order transfer function Ty’* (see equation (5.39)) for the difference frequency horizontal force on a two-dimensional circular cross-section with an axis in the mean free surface and radius R. No effect of roll. Infinite water depth. The data are presented as a function of the circular frequencies @; and @,. (Faltinsen & Zhao, 1989.)

160 SECOND-ORDER NON-LINEAR PROBLEMS

The mean square values give a useful measure of the extreme values.
Typically 0, will be 4 to 4 of the extreme values.

Let u,, = V(c/m). Then in case of small damping we may approximate
equation (5.47) by

co

du

2 = naan EEE
Ox SF(Hn) lb (c —mpey + bey?

= Sin) 55 (5.48)

The reason why we can set Sp(u,) outside the integral sign is that the
major contribution to the integral in equation (5.47) comes from the
vicinity of u = 4, when b is small.

This demonstrates that small damping b means large motions and that
the magnitude of response depends on how much slow-drift excitation
energy exists at 4 = “,. By small damping we mean small relative to the
critical damping 2mu,.

We will now use the formula for a, to discuss the standard deviation of
the slow-drift surge motion of a moored tanker. The slow-drift spectrum
Sx for surge can be calculated when we know the longitudinal drift forces
in regular waves. The slow-drift spectrum will be wave heading
dependent. The drift forces can for instance be calculated by using
three-dimensional source technique (see chapter 4) and the equation for
conservation of momentum in the fluid (see equation (5.9)). The
restoring coefficient c follows by the mooring characteristics and the
natural circular frequency by u, = V(c/(M +Aj,)), where M and Aj, are
the mass and the added mass in surge of the ship. The added mass in
surge can be calculated by a three-dimensional source technique. It will
amount to 10-20% of the mass of the ship. The damping 6 is due to hull
damping and anchor line damping. The hull damping is caused by
skin friction, eddy-making and wave-drift damping (Wichers, 1982).
Due to the low frequency of oscillation wave radiation damping can be
neglected. For higher sea states the wave-drift damping is the dominant
hull damping component. As an example, for a 235m long ship the
wave-drift damping amounted to 85% of the total damping for Hy=
8.1m, while the wave-drift damping was negligible for Hy = 2.8m. The
anchor line may also contribute significantly to the damping (Huse,
1986). This is not accounted for in the present discussion.

For slow-drift oscillations of a TLP or slow-drift oscillations in sway
of a ship both eddy-making damping and wave-drift damping have to be
included.

SLOW DRIFT MOTIONS IN IRREGULAR WAVES 161

Wave-drift damping
Wave-drift damping is caused by the waves and can be seen by
comparing free-decay model tests of a ship in still water and in regular
waves (see Fig. 5.20). We can try to explain the wave-drift damping in
surge by interpreting the slow-drift surge motion as a quasi-steady
forward and backward speed. It is well known that the added resistance
of a ship in waves is speed dependent. This is for instance evident from

Motion decay surge. Calm water

Surge (m)

° 100 200 300 400 500 600
Time (s)

Motion decay surge. Regular waves T=12s,H=8m

Surge (m)

Surge (m)

fe) 100 200 300 400 500 600
Time (s)

Fig. 5.20. Influence of wave-drift damping demonstrated by free decay tests in
surge of a tension leg platform both in calm water and in regular
waves, (Wave period T = 12s, wave height H = 8 m).