A typical histogram for the distribution of peaks is Fig. 9.1. High slamming pressures can occur when breaking waves hit the column of a platform. The top photo shows a breaking wave approaching the column of a platform and the other photo shows the situation just after the breaking wave has hit the platform. The photos are from the TCP-2 platform at the Frigg Field on the Norwegian Continental Shelf operated by Elf Aquitaine Norge A/S. (Kjeldsen & Andersen (unpublished).)

284 WATER IMPACT AND ENTRY

shown in Fig. 9.2. The most frequently occurring pressure peaks will
reach 0.4 times the pressure level exceeded by 10% of all peaks. The 1%
exceedance limit is two to three times the 10% exceedance limit. We may
also note from Fig. 9.2 that the slamming pressure has a much shorter
rise time than decay time.

In order to describe the physics of the slamming problem, let us
examine a related, but simpler problem —a horizontal cylinder that is
forced through an initially calm water surface with constant velocity V.
We assume the body has small submergence, the body has a blunt form
and the flow is two-dimensional (see Fig. 9.3). The submergence of the
lowest point on the body relative to the calm waterplane is Vz, where t is
the time variable. At this stage we will not precisely define how large the
wetted area of the body is. This depends on the theoretical approximation that will be used. We will just state that the wetted body area is

3] p

WwW

a

a

D>

3 —"
L 10% EXCEEDANCE LIMIT (Pp)

oO

rs} 25%

a 1%

ir PRESSURE
tt DETECTED

04 1.0 20 PIR,

Fig. 9.2. Probability density function of impact pressure peaks from forced
harmonic sway oscillation of a LNG-tank. Based on model tests with
two-dimensional flow. Also shown is an example of pressure
recording. (Abramson et al., 1974.)

Fig. 9.3. Definition of parameters in analysis of impact forces and pressures
on a body.

SLAMMING 285

between —c(t) <x <c(t) (see Fig. 9.3). However, we exclude the wetted
area due to spray. The reason is that we are interested in finding the
hydrodynamic pressure and force on the body and the pressure on the
body in the spray area will be very close to atmospheric pressure.

In solving the problem we will assume irrotational flow and an
incompressible fluid. This means we can use potential theory. However,
in special cases the compressibility of the fluid has to be accounted for.
The pressure is assumed constant and equal to atmospheric pressure on
the free-surface. However, this is not true when a body with a horizontal
flat bottom hits the free-surface...A compressible air pocket is then
created between the body and the free-surface in an initial phase (see
Fig. 9.4).

To analyse the problem we will use the free-surface condition ¢=0
on z= 0. This means we assume the fluid accelerations are much larger
than the gravitational acceleration g. The cylinder is replaced by an
‘equivalent’ flat plate of half-width c(t) in the mean free-surface. The
body boundary condition is transferred to the flat plate. We can show
this by starting out with the body boundary condition

where n= (m,, 0,13) is the normal vector to the body surface. (Positive
normal direction is into the fluid.) By a Taylor expansion we can write

2b _ oo & 2,2 :
Bz Bz leg az? long * OV *? Lahn

-Further, for slamming to have any practical meaning n,;<n; and

~ —1. This means the boundary condition is approximately

ag
Be Von z=0

when Ve/c(t) is small. The boundary-value problem that we have to

Ly

WATER
Fig. 9.4. Deformation of the free-surface and formation of an air pocket
during entry of a body with a horizontal flat bottom.