The quantities A, B and o are arbitrary constants. There also exist other solutions that are proportional to e~**, coskz and sin kz. However, we must disregard them since there should not be any fluid disturbance far down in the fluid, i.e. when z—> —®. From the free-surface condition (2.15) we can find that there exists a connection between the wave number & and the circular frequency @ used in equation (2.17). We find the dispersion relation: o'- (2.18) g

18 ~ SEA ENVIRONMENT

In general, equation (2.17) does not represent travelling (propagating)
waves. We must then combine solutions like (2.17) so that the x- and
t-dependence is like cos(wt + kx + y) where y is a constant phase angle.
The plus sign corresponds to waves propagating along the negative
x-axis and the minus sign corresponds to waves propagating along the
positive x-axis. The velocity of the wave form, i.e. the phase velocity c,
is w/k. This is different from the fluid velocity, which can be found from

equation (2.1). The group velocity C, or the energy propagation velocity

is a third type | of velocity used in ‘describing wave. features. It can be
found by

C, = da/dk (2.19)

(see e.g. Newman, 1977: pp. 257-66). If we use equation (2.18) we find
that, C, is 0.5g/@ for deep water waves, which is half the phase velocity.
The group velocity is important when we want to know the propagation
velocity of the front of a harmonically oscillating wavetrain. As an
example we can consider a wave maker in a model basin that generates
harmonically oscillating waves. If we want to know the time it takes for
the wave front to reach the ‘beach’ at the end of the model basin, we
should use the group veloctiy (or energy propagation velocity) in the
analysis.

We have only discussed waves propagating along the positive or
negative x-axis, We can obtain expressions for waves propagating in an
arbitrary direction 6 relative to the x-axis by simply writing the x-, yand ¢t-dependence of the velocity potential as cos(wt— kx cos B —
ky sin B + y). The z-dependence is e**. We can check this by substituting the expression into the Laplace equation. Another way to see the x-,
y-dependence is to first introduce a coordinate system (x’, y’, z) where
there is an angle B between the x-axis and the x’-axis. This means
x=x'cos $+’ sin B. By substituting this into the expressions for waves
propagating along the positive x-axis, and afterwards renaming the
(x',y’)-coordinates (x,y), we have obtained expressions for waves
propagating in an arbitrary direction 8. We should note that the waves
we are considering have infinitely long: crest lengths and that the wave
amplitude does not depend on. the position along the mean free-surface.
We later discuss other type of propagating water waves where this is not
true.

We will now discuss the results given in Table 2.1. From the
expressions in the table we note that the maximum values of the different
physical variables do not happen at the same time. To get a better idea of
this we have drawn a picture of the wave elevation at one time instant
(see Fig. 2.1). Beneath we have drawn a picture of how the dynamic
pressure due to the wave will look. With dynamic pressure we mean the
pressure part —p dp/dt (see equation (2.4)). We have not stated the

REGULAR WAVE THEORY 19
3 ‘4

7 Hy bd

2D. 9 th
5 of the pressure, whi s depth dependent. However, we note

that under a wave trough we will get a negative dynamic pressure and |
under the wave crest there will be a positive dynamic pressure. This is
what we might expect from quasi-static considerations. We note further
that under the wave crest the fluid velocity is in the wave propagation
direction. Beneath a wave trough the fluid velocity is opposite to the
wave propagation direction. We should note that the maximum absolute
value of the horizontal component of the fluid acceleration is beneath a
wave node. The maximum absolute value of the horizontal component of
the velocity is beneath either a wave crest or a wave trough.

It should be noted that the linear theory assumes the velocity potential
and fluid velocity to be constant from the mean free-surface to the

WAVE PROFILE GIVEN TIME INSTANT
x

DYNAMIC
PRESSURE

Z- COMPONENT
VELOCITY

X- COMPONENT
ACCELERATION

Z~ COMPONENT
ACCELERATION

Fig. 2.1. Wave elevation, pressure, velocity and acceleration in long- crested
sinusoidal waves propagating along the positive x-axis (see Table
2.1).