SEA LOADS ON
SHIPS AND OFFSHORE
STRUCTURES

O. M. Faltinsen

Professor, Department of Marine Technology
Norwegian Institute of Technology

” CAMBRIDGE ©

§ UNIVERSITY PRESS

CONTENTS

PUBLISHED BY THE PRESS SYNDICATE OF THE UNIVERSITY OF CAMBRIDGE
The Pitt Building, Trumpington Street, Cambridge CB2 1RP, United Kingdom

CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS
The Edinburgh Building, Cambridge CB2 2RU, UK http://www.cup.cam.ac.uk
40 West 20th Street, New York, NY 10011-4211, USA http://www.cup.org

10 Stamford Road, Oakleigh, Melbourne 3166, Australia Preface vii
© Cambridge University Press 1990 1 Introduction 1
, Definitions of motions 3
This book is in copyright. Subject to statutory exception Traditional ship problems 5
and to the provisions of relevant collective licensing agreements, Offshore structure problems 8
no reproduction of any part may take place without Hydrodynamic classification of structures 10
the written permission of Cambridge University Press. Engineering tools 11
First published 1990 2 Sea environment 13
First paperback edition 1993 Basic assumptions 13
Reprinted 1995, 1998 Regular wave theory 17
Statistical description of waves 23
Wind 31
Current 33
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library Exercises 34
ISBN 0 521 45870 6 paperback 3 Finear _waverinduced motions and loads on floating 37
stru
Transferred to digital printing 1999 Response in regula lar $e 0
Discussion on natural periods, damping and excitation
level 68
Linear wave-induced motions and loads on a tension leg
platform (TLP) in the mass—force domain 74
Heave motion of a semi-submersible 76
Minimalization of vertical ship motions 81
Roll stabilization 85
Exercises 89
4 Numerical methods for linear wave-induced motions
and loads 102
Source technique 103
Alternative solution procedures 118
Forward speed and current effects 122

oo ans . Exercises 127

vi

CONTENTS

Second-order non-linear problems
Mean wave (drift) forces and moments
Slow-drift motions in irregular waves
Slowly-varying oscillations due to wind
Sum-frequency effects

Exercises

Current and wind loads

Steady incident flow past a circular cylinder
Boundary layers

Wake behaviour

Vortex shedding

Current loads on ships

Current loads on offshore structures
Wind loads

Vortex-induced resonance oscillations
Galloping

Exercises

Viscous wave loads and damping
Morison’s equation

Flow separation

’ Oscillatory non-separated flow

Separated flow at small KC-numbers
Separated flow at high KC-numbers
Experimental tools

Exercises

Stationkeeping

Mooring systems

Thruster forces

Thruster performance and dynamic positioning
Exercises

Water impact and entry
Slamming

Water entry problems
Exercises

References
Index



















234.










PREFACE

a

The material in this book has been continuously developed since the
author started to teach hydrodynamics of ships and offshore structures at
the Norwegian Institute of Technology (NTH) in 1974. During this
period offshore oil activity has played an important role in Norwegian
society. Interest in ships for transportation has changed during these
years. At the moment there is an increasing interest in developing
high-speed marine vehicles for transportation of goods and passengers.
In the future it is expected that oil and gas exploration will move into
areas of deeper water. Examples on future new areas where ocean
engineers and naval architects can be of help is fish farming in open sea,
recovery of deep-sea minerals, and development of marine energy
resources from temperature gradients and waves. In all these areas there
is a need to know about sea loads. This is what this book is all about.
The book covers applications in a broad area. This includes conventional
ships, high-speed marine vehicles, fixed and floating offshore structures.
Many of the applications come through exercises.

Part of the material in the book has been taught for the last year siv.ing
(MSc) students at the Department of Marine Technology, NTH. It has
also been used in graduate courses at the Department of Ocean Engineering,
MIT, when the author was a visiting professor there in two periods from
1980 to 1981 and from 1987 to 1988.

A book on wave-induced motions and loads can easily be very
mathematical. The author has tried to avoid this. The hope is that
engineers with a non-mathematical background can get a good insight into
sea loads on ships and offshore structures by reading the book. However,
knowledge in calculus including vector analysis and differential equations
is necessary to read the book in detail. The reader should also be familiar
with basic hydrodynamics of potential and viscous flow.

I was encouraged by Professor J. N. Newman, MIT, to write the
book. Being an editor for the book he has also given me much valuable
advice. Dr. Svein Skjgrdal has spent a lot of time giving detailed
comments on different versions of the manuscript. He has also been
helpful in seeing the topics from a practical point of view. Many other
people should be thanked for their critical review and contributions.