that is in the same direction as the dashed line from the source point shows the velocity vector due to the source. The velocity vector due to the image sink is illustrated in a similar way. The horizontal and vertical solid lines are respectively the horizontal and vertical components of the velocity vectors. The total horizontal velocity is zero on the free-surface, which means the velocity potential is a constant on the free-surface. The constant is chosen to be zero.

II4 NUMERICAL METHODS

can be approximated by plane quadrilateral elements. The number of

‘elements N is 810 in this case. The discretization of the problem leads to

a linear equation system for the unknown source density in a similar way

to the forced heave problem for a circular cylinder in infinite fluid. The

differences, which we will point out, are

. 1. The source density is complex in the wave problem.
Physically it means that the source density is generally not
in-phase or 180° out-of-phase with the heave velocity as it is
in an infinite fluid problem (see equation (4.7)). This means

° there are N real and N imaginary unknowns or N complex

unknowns if the body is approximated by N elements and no
symmetry and antisymmetry properties are accounted for.
Symmetry and antisymmetry properties can be accounted for
in a similar way to the two-dimensional problem. This means
the equation systems written in complex variables are reduced
to N/2 x N/2 or N/4 x N/4 with respectively one or two
symmetry planes.

2. The source expression is far more complicated to compute
numerically in a wave problem compared with an infinite
fluid problem (see equation (4.25) compared to equation
(4.1)).

3. The normal velocity induced on an element by a source
distribution over the same element is different in a twodimensional and a three-dimensional problem (see exercise
4.1). We find

Le |e -s@r+O-noyt+@-coyrr sas]
=—22 (4.30)

Here (%;, 9; %) is the geometrical area centre of element S;.
4. A solution may not exist for all frequencies if the potential is
represented as a distribution of wave sources over the body
surface. For a surface piercing body there exist an infinite
number of discrete frequencies (irregular frequencies) that
cause the three-dimensional source technique to break down
(John, 1950). The assumption in John’s analysis is that no
point of the immersed surface would be outside a cylinder

Fig. 4.7. Approximation of the submerged part of a ship hull by plane
quadrilateral elements. Total number of elements is 810.

SOURCE TECHNIQUE Lis

drawn vertically downward from the intersection of the body
with the free-surface, and that the free-surface would be
intersected orthogonally by the body in its mean or rest
position. A ship without a bulbous bow will for instance
normally satisfy this assumption. However, it is possible that
John’s analysis applies to a broader class of bodies than he
restricted himself to. John shows that the lowest irregular
circular frequency @, satisfies w,(D/g) = 1.0, where D is the
draught of the structure. If we translate this to a ship at zero
forward speed it means that we are sure there are no irregular
frequencies when A/L > 2a D/L where L is the ship length.
In practice the irregular frequencies do not represent a serious
problem for analysis of ship motions at zero forward speed.
The wavelengths of importance in predicting ship motions are
not in a range where irregular frequencies occur. For a
vertical cylinder standing on the sea bed and penetrating the
free-surface, the wavelength corresponding to the lowest
irregular frequency for surge and heave is respectively 0.82D
and 1.31D with D being the diameter. In practice, the
solution will also-be unsatisfactory in the neighbourhood of
the irregular frequencies.

We must emphasize that the irregular frequencies are not
caused by any physical phenomenon. Therefore if a different
technique is used, a solution may be found at the irregular
frequencies for the source technique. An example of a
different technique is a purely analytical solution. This exists
in very special cases, for instance to calculate the wave loads
on a fixed vertical cylinder standing on the sea bed and
penetrating the free-surface (McCamy & Fuchs, 1954).

Irregular frequencies in the source technique represent
eigenfrequencies for a fictitious fluid motion inside the body
with the same free-surface condition as outside the body and
the body boundary condition @ = 0. In general it is difficult
to find the eigenfrequencies analytically before one solves the
exterior physical problem. The word fictitious for the interior
flow is stressed. The flow is not a physical ‘sloshing’ motion.
In the sloshing case the body boundary condition would be
Og/dn = 0. However, to get an idea what the irregular
frequencies might be we should have the sloshing modes in
mind. For a submerged body no irregular frequencies exist.

What is happening mathematically at an irregular
frequency is that the determinant of the coefficient matrix in
the linear equation system for the unknown source densities
goes to zero when the number of unknowns goes to infinity.