sinusoidal form we find that y = 1.16 and (A/D) max = 1.51. Having determined the amplitude of oscillations of the riser and the mode shape we can easily calculate stresses due to the vortex-induced oscillations. A very important consequence of the vortex-induced oscillations is that the drag force increases. Skop et al. (1977) proposed an empirical formula for a rigid circular cylinder. They write for Wp>1 A, = (2a St? (6.56) (6.57) where Wp = (1+ 2A/D) fa/fro (6.58)

212 CURRENT AND WIND LOADS

A cruder approximation is Cp/Cpp = 1+ 2(A/D) max. This formula can
be interpreted as saying that there is an apparent projected area D + 2A
due to the oscillating cylinder.

We should be aware of the effect of roughness and Reynolds number
on vortex-induced oscillations. Transverse oscillations decay in the
critical region both for smooth and rough cylinders.

Griffin (1985) has discussed the effect of current shear on vortex
shedding. He says that moderate shear levels of practical importance
(B ~0.01 to 0.03) do not seem to decrease the likelihood of vortexinduced vibrations for flexible cylinders. Experience with long cables in
the ocean indicates that the vibration level is decreased. The ‘steepness’
parameter is defined as

z__D av
© Veer dz

Here dV /dz is the vertical velocity gradient, D is the cylinder diameter
for a circular cylinder and V,., is a reference velocity, e.g. the mid-span
incident velocity.

All the cases we have discussed are due to steady incident flow.
However, vortex-induced oscillation may also occur in ambient harmonic oscillatory flow. We should also note the possibility of in-line
oscillations. The reason is the oscillatory behaviour of the drag-force. In
subcritical flow the drag-force on a fixed, rigid cylinder consists of the
sum of mean drag-force and a harmonic oscillatory force of frequency
twice the vortex shedding frequency. The in-line oscillations are
significantly less than the transverse oscillations.

For a marine riser in waves and current we should note that the
lock-in cannot take place on the whole riser at the same time. This is due
to the attenuation of the waves with depth.

It is possible to suppress vortex-induced oscillations by various types
of spoilers or by increasing the damping. We may also try to avoid the
critical reduced velocities which cause vortex-induced oscillations. This
means the reduced velocity Up =U,/(f{,D) should not be in a range
from five to seven. .

A common device for suppression of vortex-induced oscillations is a
helical strake (see Fig. 6.30). For a helical strake to be optimal it is said
that one should use three spirals, set the pitch equal to five times the
diameter (D) and choose a fin height of 0.1-0.12D.

Negative effects of the helical strakes are that marine growth reduces
the effect and the fins cause an increased drag (Cp = 1.3 at Rn =5- 10°).
There may also be handling problems associated with them.

(6.59)

7 GALLOPING

5 Galloping is a different phenomenon from ‘lock-in’. ‘Lock-in’ happens

when the vortex shedding frequency is close to a natural frequency for

GALLOPING 213

the structure and can in a simplistic way be understood as resonance
oscillations. Galloping is instability oscillations of the structure that are
significant for higher reduced velocities Ug than those when lock-in
occurs. Let us explain how galloping can occur by considering an
example with a long cylinder of constant cross-section. We assume
two-dimensional flow in the cross-sectional plane. We define a coordinate system (x,y) as in Fig. 6.31. The incident flow is steady with
velocity U, in the positive x-direction. The body is symmetric about the
y-axis and assumed to have a resonance frequency f, when it oscillates in
the y-direction. A fundamental assumption is that the fluid forces are

quasi-steady. Oscillating vortex shedding forces do not matter. This is
approximately correct if Up> 10 (see Fig. 6.29). Galloping motion will
occur_if the hydrodynamic forces. cause a sufficiently large negative
damping of the transverse oscillations. We will show this in more detail.

The equation of motion for the transverse oscillation 72 of the cylinder

Fig. 6.30. Helical strake used as a device for suppression of vortex-induced
oscillations.

Fig. 6.31. Cross-sectional plane of a long cylinder used in discussion of
galloping motions. (U, = incident current velocity, U.. = incidem
velocity seen from a reference frame following the motion 7, of the
cylinder.)