the body has no constant speed. The velocity potential for the incident waves is written as (see Fig. 5.4) hoa Sete cos(wt — ky) (5.11) with €, being the amplitude of the waves. Due to the presence of the body there will be generated waves. The velocity potential of the INCIDENT REFLECTED TRANSMIT TED WAVES WAVES WAVES ~—T T © =S; Fig. 5.4, Definition of control surfaces and wave systems in the analysis of drift forces on a two-dimensional body.

138 SECOND-ORDER NON-LINEAR PROBLEMS

reflected waves is written as
Ar ;
baa Se cos(wt + ky + €) (5.12)

where the wave amplitude Ap and phase angle ¢€ are functions of the
body form and motion. The velocity potential of the transmitted waves is
written as

A
or =o tee cos(wt — ky + 5) (5.13)

ry is a combination of the incident waves and the waves generated at
y—> by the body.

When the two-dimensional version of equation (5.9) is used to find the
horizontal drift-force F,, it is convenient to divide S, into two parts.
One part S,” is from the mean free-surface level z= 0 to the instantaneous position €., of the free-surface (see Fig. 5.4). Since ¢.. is a
first-order quantity and we are evaluating the integral correctly to second
order in wave amplitude, it is only necessary to evaluate the integrand
correctly to first order when we integrate along S,”. This means the term
pV,’ can be neglected and the pressure p approximated by

abr
~ pez - po Lt
pgs — p at leno
along S,”. The result is a contribution — 4pgé..2 = — 4pgA,?.

In the integration from z = —® to zg = 0 we have to keep second-order
terms in the integrand. The linear terms give a zero mean value. The
hydrostatic pressure —pgz will result in a force contribution that is
balanced out by a similar contribution at the control surface at y = —%,
The integration along S_.. is performed in a similar way as the
integration over S.,. The total result is

P= Be + An? Ar’) (5.14)

Longuet-Higgins (1977) has generalized equation (5.14) to finite water
depth. The right hand side should then be multiplied by
(1 + 2kh/sinh 2kh), where h is the water depth.

Maruo’s formula follows by assuming the average energy flux is zero
through Sg. This means

bP = AR t+ Ar’ (5.15)

We can show this by using equation (3.21) and noting that there is no
work done on the body during one period of oscillation. This means
SJs,(P —PoUnds=0. By using dE/dt=0, it follows from equation

MEAN WAVE (DRIFT) FORCES AND MOMENTS 139

(3.22) that JJs.45_, (06/8t)(Ap/dn) ds =0. From this condition we can
show equation (5.15) by using equations (5.11), (5.12) and (5.13).
Equation (5.14) can then be written as

Pan pA (5.16)
According to the formula the wave-drift force will always act in the wave
propagation direction. Due to condition (5. 15) Maruo’s formula (equa-

tion (5716)) is not valid if the body is an active wave power device.

Equation (5.16) shows that wave-drift forces are connected with a
structure’s ability to cause waves. The waves due to the body are the sum
of (a) the radiating. waves when the body is forced to oscillate in each
mode of motion, and (&) the diffraction waves when the body is
restrained from oscillating and subject to incident waves. For long
wavelengths relative to the cross-sectional dimensions the body will not
disturb the wave field. This means the reflected wave amplitude Ap and
the wave drift force become negligible.

When the wavelengths are very short, the incident waves are totally
reflected from a surface-piercing body with vertical hull surface in the
wave zone. This means Ap=£, and F,=(pg/2)f,7. According to
equation (5.15) the reflected wave amplitude can never be larger than ¢,.
This means the wave-drift force can never be larger than (pg/2)€,’.

When the body motions are large, for instance due to heave resonance,
Ag is likely to be large. This means that the wave-drift force may show a
peak in a frequency range around the resonance frequency. This can be
seen in Fig. 5.5.

For a submerged body Ag will go to zero when the wavelength goes to
zero. In the special case of a submerged circular cylinder that is either
restrained from oscillating or whose centre follows a circular orbit
Ogilvie (1963) showed that Ap is zero for all frequencies and all depths of
submergence.

The order of magnitude of wave-drift forces F, on a free-surfacepiercing two- dimensional body relative to current forces F, on the same
structure when there are no waves present can be estimated by

F 2 0.5 pgAR” gAR’

F, 0.5pCpDUZ CpDU2Z

Here Cp is the drag coefficient for the current flow, D is the draught and
U, is the current velocity. For instance, in a current velocity of lms ',a
draught D = 10m and Cp = 1.0 the ratio is simply Ap’ in square metres.
This illustrates the importance of wave-drift forces on large volume
structures like ships. However, one must not be misled by this

discussion into believing that the effect of current and waves can be